THE HISTORY
OF
Germain Street Baptist Church
ST. JOHN, N. B.
FOR ITS FIRST ONE HUNDRED YEARS
1810—1910

SAINT JOHN, N. B.

THE SAINT JOHN GLOBE PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED

1910

INTRODUCTION

At the annual business meeting held in January, 1909, T. D. Denham,
D. Hunt and T.H. Belyea, surviving Church Clerks, were appointed as a
committee to prepare for publication in book from the History of this
Church from its formation in 1810 to its Centennial in 1910.

At the first meeting of the committee the writer, being senior
surviving clerk, undertook the preparation of the History of the
Church for the One Hundred Years of its existence—so far as it might
be possible to secure the data for doing so; while to Mr. Belyea, the
present clerk, was assigned the writing of the biographical sketches
of the departed deacons; and to Mr. Hunt, the treasurer, the
preparing of a complete account of the mortgages that have been on
the present buildings and how they have been paid off.

The old records of the Church had been placed in the vault of the
Deacon Francis for safe keeping, but when the vault was opened after
the fire of 1877, it was found to contain nothing but charred remains
of the books—the writing being undecipherable. This made the securing
of the facts in connection with the early years a very difficult
task; but from various sources the events set forth in the following
pages have been obtained, and so far as possible verified, so that
while parts of the History are not nearly as full as we could desire,
in the main, I think, the account will be found to be as accurate as
it is possible to make it at this late date. It is to be regretted
that this work was not undertaken during the lifetime of a number of
our older members who have since passed away, as their personal
recollections, extending back for many years, would have been of
great assistance in the preparation of our History.

Some of the information has been secured from Dr. Saunders’ “History
of the Baptists,” and Dr. Bill’s “Fifty Years with the Baptists,”
while the very full account of the life and labors Rev. Samuel
Robinson is largely from two historical sermons delivered by Dr. Bill
in 1863, from the securing of which from the Library of Acadia
University we are indebted to Mr. Cohoon. Dr. Cutten also placed a
collection of the “Minutes of Associations,” dating back to 1810—in
which are references to this Church—at my disposal. For later minutes
I am indebted to Dr. McIntyre and others. The description of the
interior of the old wooden building and the early methods of lighting
are from a paper by the late Miss Sarah J. Blakslee. In the early
part of the work much of the original phraseology has been retained—
their writer making only such changes as were required to make a
connected story. From 1870 much of the matter is from my own personal
knowledge of the affairs of the Church, and from the records we still
possess. Another source of information—though necessarily
curtailed—is from the document deposited in the corner stone of the
present edifice, which was prepared by Dr. Carey, and engrossed on
parchment by the writer. It was at first proposed to open the corner
stone and copy the document, but this was avoided by securing an
excellent account published in one of the City papers in 1877.

During the century the Church has been ministered to by twenty duly
inducted pastors, besides others who have acted for a time as supply.
In the early years the pastorates were mostly short, but later the
pulpit was filled by four faithful ministers—Rev. Samuel Robinson,
Drs. I. E. Bill, G. M. W. Carey, and G. O. Gates, whose combined
terms of service reached nearly sixty years.

Besides the deacons, who with us are elected for life, some brethren
have filled the clerk’s office for long periods. We cannot tell when
G. A. Garrison was appointed—it may be he was the immediate successor
of his father, Nathan Garrison, the first clerk—but we know that he
was in office previous to the separation and continued to act up to
1870, when J. J. Bostwick was appointed. After a short term by F. F.
Porter, the writer was appointed in 1879, and was followed by D. Hunt
and the present clerk, each of whom have served for a number of years.

These long terms of service are not confined to any particular
office, as L. McMann was treasurer for many years, as was also his
son S.C. McMann, who was succeeded in turn by T. D. Denham, T. S.
Simms, S. McDiarmid and D. Hunt; so that the Church has had only six
Treasurers and the same number of Clerks during the past forty years.
Many have also served as Trustees for a number of years, among whom
we recall Deacon Harding, who probably served longer than any other
member of the Board. With the possible exception of G. A. Garrison,
Deacon Simms efficiently filled the office of Sunday School
Superintendent for the longest term—a quarter of a century—while
since early in the pastorate of Dr. Carey, only three have
administered the Benevolent Fund—Deacons Kinsman, Dyall and Lewis.
Thus it will be seen that this has not only been a Church of long
pastorates, but that many of the officers have also had long terms of
office.

We are looking forward hopefully to the coming of our pastor elect,
Rev. F. S. Porter, whom we are expecting soon to be with us to take
up the duties of the pastorate.

In reviewing the first Century of our History we cannot but be
impressed with the thought of the self-sacrificing labors of the
faithful men and women of the past; who, in the face of difficulties
and disabilities we haply know nothing of by experience, laid deep
and firm foundations for the success that has come to us as a Church
during all these years. When we consider the civil and religious
liberty that has come to us as a result, in part, of the work of the
founders of this old Church—we cannot but that God for what He has
done for us in the past, and leaning on His Almighty arm, press
forward determined with His help to strive to achieve a still larger
measure of success in the future than has been ours in the past.

T. D. Denham
St. John, N. B., September, 1910.

HISTORY OF Germain Street Baptist Church

ST. JOHN, NEW BRUNSWICK.

—————

REV. EDWARD MANNING’S VISITS TO ST. JOHN IN 1800 OR 1805.

THE REV. JOSEPH CRANDALL in his autobiography says: “After the
organization of the church at Waterborough, in the autumn of 1800,
Mr. Manning on returning from a visit up the St. John River stayed
some time in St. John and baptized converts.” He also thought that
Mr. Manning organized a church here, and if so, our history goes back
to 1800 instead of 1810. It is therefore probable that it was in the
autumn of 1800, instead of 1805—the year named by Dr. Bill—that the
first baptisms took place here. At the time of Mr. Manning’s first
visit, there was no Baptist place of worship or Baptist family in the
city. Mr. Manning had been directed by a friend to call on Mr. George
Harding, son of Captain William Harding. He did so, and was most
kindly received. Mr. George Harding lived at the lower end of Germain
street, and invited the young minister to preach in his house. His
father, Captain Harding, who lived on Dock Street, also placed his
house at Mr. Manning’s service. Captain Lovitt, Mrs. Harper, Mr. A.
Magee, and a colored sister—Amy Nickson—all opened their houses to
the preaching of God’s word. As a result of these services, a revival
followed and many began to inquire what they should do to be saved.
The preacher pointed them to the Lamb of God as the only remedy, and
several professed conversion. Two of Captain Harding’s daughters and
his son George were among the number—the latter being the first
person baptized by immersion in this city.

REV. JOSEPH CRANDALL’S VISITS BETWEEN 1805 AND 1808.

After Edward Manning, came Rev. Joseph Crandall in the power and
spirit of the Gospel. His ministry was the means of doing much good.
Captain William Harding and his wife, William Stenning, and others
were baptized by him. These early baptisms occasioned much excitement
in the city. The people flocked in large numbers to witness them.
Some went to pray and others to mock and blaspheme; but on the part
of others this administration of the ordinance in its primitive form
led to the prayerful examination of the Word of God, and the general
result was a conversion to Baptist sentiments and practice. In the
absence of a stated ministry and house of worship the converts met in
each other’s houses for mutual exhortation and prayer. These meetings
were attended with a rich blessing. All were of one heart and mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and as a result, the
Word of God grew and multiplied greatly in the community.

MR. THOMAS PETTINGILL’S REMOVAL TO THE CITY.

In 1808 the little band of believers were greatly strengthened by the
removal from Kingston to St. John of Mr. Thomas Pettingill, who had
been converted under the labors of Elder Innis. Mr. Pettingill was
filled with religious fervor and an earnest desire to bring sinners
to Christ. His house was at once consecrated to the service and
worship of God, and his heart and purse were open to support the
infant cause. When Baptist ministers came to the city, they were
gladly received by him. In the absence of ordained ministers the
members did not fail to maintain regularly the worship of Almighty
God.

VISITS OF EVANGELISTS, 1808-1810.

In addition to the visits of the Ministerial Pioneers from Nova
Scotia, ministers were sent here by the Massachusetts Baptist
Missionary Society. Elders Isaac Chase, Henry Hale, and David Merrill
spent considerable time in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. They were
eminently useful in preaching the Gospel, administering its
ordinances, and in confirming the infant churches in the doctrines
and practice of the New Testament Christianity. Each of these
Evangelists visited the city and rendered valuable service to the
cause of the Master.

CHURCH ORGANIZED 1810.

On May 23rd, 1810, the Church was organized by Rev. Henry Hale, and
called the First Baptist Church of St. John. The membership consisted
of twelve persons—seven brothers and five sisters, who had been
brought to a knowledge of the truth through the labors of Revs.
Edward Manning, Joseph Crandall, James Innes, Theodore Harding, James
Manning, Joseph Dimmock, Thomas Ansley, and other evangelists. The
names of the original members so far as we are able to obtain them
are as follows: (1) Jeremiah Drake, grandfather of Brunswick and the
Misses Drake; (2) Thomas Pettingill, father of the late James
Pettingill; (3) Nathan Garrison, father of the late Deacon George A.
Garrison; (4) George Harding, son of the late Captain William
Harding; (5) John M. Wilmot; (6) William Stenning, an uncle of the
late Deacon J. H. Harding. (1) Mrs. Thomas Harding, mother of the
late Deacon John H. Harding; (2) Mrs. Uriah Hatfield; (3) Mrs.
Lovett, wife of Captain Lovett. It is probable that the other three
members were from among the following persons: Mrs. Harper, Mr. A.
Magee, Amy Nixon, Captain William Harding and his wife, all of whom
had shown much interest previous to the formation of the Church.

First Officers.

Nathan Garrison was the first Church Clerk. Thomas Pettingill was
chosen Deacon of the little Church on account of his deep-toned piety
and sincere devotion to the cause of God. He was soon joined in
office by Jeremiah Drake, and “these two, like Jachin and Boaz, the
pillars of Solomon’s temple, did, as these names signify, Establish
in Strength the truth as it is in Jesus, both by precept and example.
In the absence of a settled minister, they regularly maintained and
led the religious exercises of the Church, so that when they were
called up higher they had seen the cause of Christ greatly advanced
through their instrumentality, and departing bequeathed to the church
a precious legacy,
‘The stainless memory of the just,
The wealth beyond the grave.’”

Mr. Asa Blakslee was the first person baptized after the organization
of the Church.

Mrs. Thomas Harding, who died in her ninetieth year in August, 1875,
was the last of the twelve that formed the little band in 1810. She
saw the small vine send out boughs to the sea and branches to the
river, and many dwell under its goodly shadow.

In 1812 the Church numbered twenty-seven members. They applied for
admission and were received into the Association at Upper Granville,
N. S., this year.

For the first three years the Church was not in a position to call a
pastor, but was supplied from time to time by visiting ministers.

FIRST PASTOR CALLED.

————

The first pastor, the Rev. Edmund Reice, was called in 1813. He was a
Frenchman who came to Halifax as a midshipman in a French vessel
which was taken as a prize by the English. His conversion was
remarkable. Intent, like many of his countrymen, on deriding
religion, and leading a ball in a house just opposite the place where
the revival meetings were held at Yarmouth, like Saul, he was struck
down by the power of God and in intense agony of soul he cried aloud
for mercy. He was truly converted, became a Baptist, and entered the
ministry. After preaching for some time elsewhere, he was called to
be a pastor of this Church.. During his pastorate a revival occurred
and many were added to the Lord. He remained as a pastor about three
years. Later he went to New Orleans to evangelize the French, and
afterwards was pastor of the First Baptist Church of Baltimore, where
he died.

Places of Meeting.

The Church first worshipped in a small room on the ground floor of a
building on the south side of Princess Street, owned and occupied by
Mr. Cornelius Harbell. The building was next to the residence of the
late Dr. Sheffield. From Princess street the Church moved to and
occupied a small church edifice on Germain street, between Duke and
Queen. This building had been used, on the formation of the city, as
a court house and common council chamber. It was then occupied by the
Episcopalians, and afterwards by the Methodists. It soon became too
small, and in 1815 the present site, on the corner of Germain and
Queen streets, was purchased. The first building was completed and
dedicated in July, 1818. The following advertisement appeared in the
city papers: “A new Baptist meeting house will be opened for the
worship of God on Lord’s Day next, when appropriate sermons will be
preached and hymns sung. Collections will be made toward the expense
of the building. Services at 11 A.M. and 6 P. M. (Sgd.) THOMAS
GRIFFIN, Pastor.

St. John, July 8th, 1818.”

This shows that even at the early date the ministers realized the
value of the press.

This old wooden Church fronted on Queen street and had a seating
capacity of 500 to 600. On each side of the entrance was a short
flight of stairs leading up to the Church. At the head of these
stairs in recesses on either side were large stoves for heating the
building. Opposite the entrance was a high box pulpit with fourteen
steps leading up to it. Behind the pulpit was a large window looking
north. In front was a square pew with a railing round the top and
dark maroon curtains. In the pew was a table on which were four
pewter plates used in taking up the collection. During the service
the deacons sat in this pew. At this time they were: Drake,
Pettingill and Gale. There was a gallery on three sides of the
Church—the choir being opposite the pulpit. In the gallery to the
left of the minister sat the colored people, of whom there were quite
a number. On the ground floor the wall pews were square, while those
in the centre were single pews. The pews were upholstered to suit the
taste of the owners, some being done with scarlet, garnet or green,
and the others with more somber colors. When the Church was enlarged,
in 1838, the old-fashioned high pulpit was removed, much to the
satisfaction of the worshippers. William Stenning and Thomas Harding
superintended the erection of the new Church, and Brother Stenning’s
funeral sermon was the first preached in the building. Subscriptions
towards the building fund were opened October 14th, 1815. The
following are among the amongst contributed: Thomas Pettingill, John
M. Wilmot, Thomas Harding and William Stenning £50 each; Nathan
Garrison £25; John Dyer and William Harding £20 each; Benjamin Gale
and Henry Blakslee £15 each; Andrew S. Green, Joshua Lane, Samuel
Chadburn, Henry Holmes and Jeremiah Drake £10 each; and others from
£1 to £5.

Lighting.

At first candles were used to light the Church. From the centre of
the ceiling was suspended a brass chandelier with twenty-four
candles. On the walls of the main floor and gallery above every third
pew there was a movable candlestick, and on each side of the reading
desk were two movable candlesticks attached to stationary stands. The
sexton wearing soft slippers would noiselessly ascend the pulpit
steps, snuffers and tray in hand, and passing behind the minister
snuff the candles; then closing the pulpit door, slowly descend the
steps. He would then proceed round the Church snuffing the
candles—some fifty in all. By the time had made a circuit of the
church it was time to commence again, and usually he made the rounds
three times during the service. At times a draft from the door or
window would cause the candles to flare, and many a broadcloth coat
or silk dress would be spattered with grease. In course of time sperm
oil lamps were substituted for the candles, and they were considered
a very great improvement. In 1845, gas was introduced into the city,
and used in this church for the first time at the formation of the
Maritime Convention in 1846. The present system of electric lighting
having been introduced only so recently as 1906.

REV. THOMAS GRIFFIN.

Rev. Thomas Griffin, who came from England, was the second pastor. He
took up the work in 1818, and remained two years.

In 1820 the Female Mite Society contributed from Missions £15 3s. 7d.
($ 60.72). “The Church was small.” says Dr. Bill, “having only about
sixty members and they had just completed their first house of
worship. This contribution indicates the depth of their piety, and
their earnestness in sending the Gospel to the destitute.”

REV. RICHARD SCOTT.

Rev. Richard Scott was next called to the pastorate, being the third
pastor. He came from England in the spring of 1821. On July 1st of
this year, the Baptist churches in New Brunswick were formed into a
separate Association, and met with this church. At this time there
were in New Brunswick 13 churches, 6 ministers, and 506 members, our
membership being 59. Elders Harris and Miller remained after the
close of the Association and conducted Revival Services. Rev. Richard
Scott went to the United States and collected toward the debt on the
Church $1,061.00.

On Mr. Scott’s retirement a young man by the name of Densmore, who
had been converted in a lumber camp, came to the city. He was on his
way to the United States intending to devote himself to the ministry
and was filled with the spirit of the Gospel. At the request of the
Church he remained some time, and under his ministrations the Church
was greatly revived and edified. For some time the Church was without
a pastor, but was visited by Revs. Joseph Crandall, R. Davis, C. M.
James, D. Dunbar and T. Ansley. The ministry of these brethren
greatly comforted and confirmed the Church, and a few were added to
the membership.

REV. CHARLES MILLER.

Rev. Charles Miller, 1824, was called as the fourth pastor. He
remained two years, during which time eighty persons were added to
the Church, the most of them by baptism. He was born in 1749 at
Stirling Scotland, and was brought up a Congregationalist. He was
ordained a Baptist Minister at Sackville in 1820. He was pastor on
the Miramichi from 1821 to 1823. He left this city in 1826 for the
United States, where he spent the rest of his days, the latter part
of which were spent at Skowhegan, Maine.

REV. JOSEPH CRANDALL.

Rev. Joseph Crandall supplied the pulpit as pastor for a short time
following Rev. Charles Miller, and his work was greatly blessed. He
was born in Rhode Island. His parents came to Chester about 1775,
when he was an infant. He was converted and united with the church at
Chester, when under the care of Rev. Joseph Dimmock. He was ordained
pastor of the church at Sackville in 1799, and was pastor of a number
of churches in New Brunswick. He died February 20th, 1858, having
reached the age of eighty-six years, after having preached the Gospel
for nearly sixty years.

REV. CHARLES TUPPER.

Rev. Charles Tupper, father of Sir Charles Tupper, became the sixth
pastor in 1826, but remained only a short time on account of ill
health. Rev. Charles Tupper was born August 16th, 1794, at
Cornwallis, N. S. He began to teach school at nineteen. He united
with the Cornwallis Church in 1815, began to preach in 1816, and was
ordained in 1819. He died January, 1881, after a ministry of
sixty-five years. As a student, preacher, pastor, teacher and writer,
he was very successful. He mastered thirteen languages, so as to be
able to read the Bible in them all. Of his controversies and
discourses one of his opponents said that “He wrote with the
seriousness of a Christian, and the politeness of a gentleman.” He
formed the first Temperance Society in New Brunswick. He was the
editor of the Baptist Missionary Magazine for Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick. In 1838, he acted as a principal of the Baptist Seminary
at Fredericton. In 1857 the degree of D. D. was conferred by Acadia
University. He was noted for his piety, great ability and devotion to
duty.

After Mr. Tupper’s retirement the pulpit was supplied for nearly two
years by Mr. Enoch Freeman, a student of Waterville College. In 1827
a Missionary Society was formed and the sum of £17 10s. 0d. ($ 70.00)
was raised. In 1828 the Association was again held with this Church.

REV. FREDERICK MILES.

Rev. Frederick Miles, who had been educated at King’s College,
Windsor, was ordained in 1828 and became the seventh pastor. Numbers
of persons were added to the Church through the faithful labors of
Mr. Miles. During his pastorate of three years, fifty were received
by baptism. In the autumn of 1830, Mr. Miles resigned for the purpose
of completing his theological course at Newton.

After the retirement of Rev. Mr. Miles, the Rev. Samuel Bancroft
supplied the pulpit for a time with much acceptance, and several
converts were added during his short term of service.

REV. J. G. NAILOR.

Rev. J. G. Nailor, of England, visited the city in September. 1831,
and was invited to occupy the pulpit. Being a man of more than
ordinary talents, his preaching was highly approved of by the Church
and he was called to the pastorate. He declined the call, but agreed
to remain for a few months as acting pastor, when he left for the
United States. In this year a good Sunday School was conducted. This
is the first time the Sunday School is mentioned in any of the
accounts.

REV. THOMAS CURTIS

Rev. Thomas Curtis came here from England and became the tenth
pastor—serving from 1832 to 1835. He was a man of great intellectual
power, and his sermons were exceedingly rich in evangelical truth. He
was a profound student of the Bible, and had distinguished himself by
his Biblical attainments in his own country, and his ministrations
were highly appreciated. In 1845 he was pastor of the Baptist Church
at Charlestown, South Carolina, and highly esteemed for his mental
attainments and consistent religious character.

REV. J. D. CASEWELL’S FIRST PASTORATE

The Church being again without a pastor, instructed their clerk, Mr.
James Holman, who was going to England on business, to apply to Rev.
Mr. Lester, an eminent Baptist minister of Liverpool, for advice in
regard to a suitable young man as future pastor. He responded to the
wishes of the Church and selected J. D. Casewell. He accepted the
proposal to come to St. John, and before leaving England was
ordained. He was inducted into the pastorate in June, 1835. His
eminent pulpit talents, combined with a kind and generous heart, gave
great promise of future success. He continued to serve the Church two
years when his health gave out and he left for his native land.

Rev. Samuel Bancroft then supplied the Church for the second time, as
he had previously done in 1830. He was a man of sterling piety, and
sincere devotion to the cause of Christ, and several converts were
added to the church during his ministry. He died at an advanced age
in 1876, and rests from his labors.

REV. SAMUEL ROBINSON, 1838-1850.

——————

REV. SAMUEL ROBINSON was born in the North of Ireland. He experienced
religion early in life, and when still a youth commenced preaching in
his own country as a Presbyterian. He came to this country and
settled in Charlotte County. The Rev. Thos. Ansley visited that
district in 1830, and was instrumental in directing Mr. Robinson to
an investigation of Believers’ Baptism as taught in the New
Testament. The examination resulted in impressing his mind with the
idea that there is no valid authority in the Scriptures for Infant
Baptism, and that Christian Baptism is Immersion in the name of the
sacred Trinity, upon a profession of faith in Jesus Christ. Mr.
Ansley’s visit to St. George took place under peculiarly impressive
circumstances. In the early part of his ministry he has visited
Charlotte County, and had been the means of producing a very powerful
revival of religion. Long years had passed, and a great declension in
spiritual things prevailed; but there were a few who cherished the
remembrance of this revival visit of Mr. Ansley, and were anxious to
hear his voice once more. He was invited to visit St. George, and
received the message as sent from God. He came, lifted up his voice,
trumpet-tones, and a wide-spread revival followed. The man of God
felt he had a message for Mr. Robinson, so sought him out and
delivered it. The saintly appearance of the Evangelist, the solemnity
of his address, and the fervency of his prayers made a deep
impression upon the mind of this young Presbyterian brother. It was
arranged for Mr. Robinson to attend one of the Evangelist’s services.
As the service proceeded, the preaching, so simple, so unctious,
inspired Mr. Robinson with strange and powerful emotions. He felt his
heart drawn to the venerable preacher with a strong religious
affection, and ere he was aware, the mantle of the old Elijah had
fallen upon the young Elijah. Still he had no idea of becoming a
Baptist. After Mr. Ansley had returned to his home in Bridgetown, Mr.
Robinson was led to prayerfully study the New Testament as he has
never done before, in reference to his duty regarding this matter,
and was constrained contrary to his training to confess that the
study of the New Testament had made him a Baptist. In due time he
wrote to Mr. Ansley to come over and baptize him. The Baptism was
appointed to take place at St. David’s—a most central position. The
Baptismal day arrived and crowds flocked from all sections of the
country to witness the ordinance. The venerable administrator came to
the discharge of his duty invested with the majesty of the Spirit’s
power, and all felt: “Surely God is in this place.” Having
accomplished his work, Mr. Ansley’s course on earth was done, and he
died without reaching his home. Mr. Robinson continued his labors in
Charlotte County for some seven or eight years. The speed sprang up
in all directions, and an abundant harvest was gathered in.

Mr. Robinson came to St. John for the first time in 1838. The Church
had for some time been in a cold divided state, but a change for the
better was soon apparent, and the ministry of Mr. Robinson was so
acceptable that it was soon necessary to enlarge the Church by an
addition of seventeen feet. This met the demand for sittings, and
gave an opportunity to provide a Baptistry. Second Baptist Church.

Soon after Mr. Robinson came, the restoration of several members, who
had been separated from the fellowship of the Church by reason of
differences which had arisen, took place, with the understanding that
a second church should be formed. These members therefore received
their dismission, and by the advice of a council duly called were
formed into what was known as the Second Baptist Church. They built a
church in 1840—the building now in the possession of the St. John’s
Presbyterian Church on King street East. They called different
pastors, and for a time enjoyed prosperity, but owing to a
combination of adverse circumstances the movement did not succeed. It
may have been that the time was not ripe for a second church, and
consequently it ceased to exist.

Shortly after his coming the Church requested Mr. Robinson to remove
to the city permanently and devote all his time to the work here. He
accepted the call provisionally, and spent a large portion of his
time during 1838 and 1839 in this city, laboring with untiring energy
and enlarged success. This he continued to do, until by the earnest
solicitations of the people, combined with the blessing of God upon
his ministry, he was convinced that it was his duty to accept the
permanent pastorate of this Church. He removed his family to St.
John, and a parsonage was built on Germain street adjoining the
Church. A small building had previously stood upon this lot which had
been used as a vestry. In 1841 the rock was removed from under the
Church, and the vestry for the use of the Sunday School and prayer
meeting was completed.

Music.

For a number of years there were no chants, responses, organ, or paid
singers, but the congregation joined heartily in the singing. Up to
Mr. Robinson’s time there was no music during the taking of the
collection, and the noise of the pennies and coppers dropping on the
pewter plates was not at all pleasing. The choir prevailed on Mr.
Robinson, who was fond of music, to obtain the consent of the deacons
for them to give what was then known as a “Copper Tune.” After much
persuasion the deacons consented, and the next Sunday the choir sang
the anthem “Great is the Lord and Greatly to be Praised.” The deacons
were much alarmed at such “dance music” being given in the house of
God on the Sabbath day. At the close of the service they met, and
determined that such music must be stopped. Mr. Robinson was
instructed to go to the choir at once and stop such unseemly
proceedings. That pastor eventually prevailed on the deacons to allow
the choir to sing during the collection, on condition that they sing
only quiet tunes. This they did for a while, till the prejudice was
broken down, when they sang such pieces as they thought best, and the
deacons did not again interfere.

In January, 1840, a series of special services were commenced by the
pastor and Rev. Charles Tupper, the latter continuing to labor with
the pastor during the winter.

In 1841 a revival commenced in the Sunday School. A number of the
scholars confessed conversion and were baptized. The work extended to
the congregation and a number of young men and women professed a
new-born faith.

On the 16th day of May, 1841, the Carleton Branch was formed into a
separate church; and in 1842 a church was formed at Musquash,
consisting of about twenty members.

At Grand Bay twelve of fourteen persons were baptized and received
into the membership of this Church. On the formation of the Fairville
Church in 1881, those remaining on our roll were dismissed to that
church. The work was continued at Musquash, Grand Bay and Red Head.
There were weekly accessions for months in succession, and a rich
harvest of souls were gathered in, so that 1842 was a year of
refreshing in this Church and its outposts.

The commercial crisis of 1843 produced much financial embarrassment,
and occasioned many removals on the part of church members; but the
labors of the pastor were incessant, and the spirit of revival was
enjoyed in some measure, though not to the same extent as in the
previous year.

The mercantile depression continued and was greatly felt by the
Church through 1844; but the work of God advanced despite all
depressing influences, and some fifteen were baptized during the
year. The pastor was aided in his work by Brother John Francis, whose
zeal and earnestness in the cause produced a deep impression on many
hearts.

The Portland Church was organized in 1842, and 1846 the Association
met with them, this Church assisting in entertaining the delegates.
On the Sabbath an interesting meeting was held in the open air in the
neighborhood of “The Bethel” on Britain street. Several were
converted, and the worship of God established in that place. In 1847
“The Bethel” was completed and opened for worship. It was designed to
be a free house—open to sailors, and any who might be induced to come
and hear the message of life. It is worthy of note that “The Bethel”
was erected on the very ground where a house once stood, occupied by
a colored sister belonging to this Church, and was for many years
consecrated as a place of prayer.

The Baptist Convention was organized in this Church in 1846. At this
time the deacons were: N. S. De Mille, Thomas Lockey, Samuel Kinsman,
and John Smith. The cause was greatly revived in 1847, twenty being
added by baptism and fifteen by letter.

One of Mr. Robinson’s methods for aggressive work was to send out the
members in bands of four to hold meetings in different parts of the
city and vicinity. Besides the places previously referred to these
included Brussels street, Pitt Street, Marsh Bridge and Loch Lomond.
Such a meeting was established on Brussels street in a private room.
It soon became a Mission station. In 1847 the erection of the present
edifice was commenced, and in 1850 a separate church was organized.

1848 was distinguished by the out-pouring of the Spirit’s power. The
gracious work commenced in March in the Sunday School under the
superintendence of Deacon G. A. Garrison. Eight young persons
presented themselves for baptism and were joyfully received by the
Church. The good work proceeded as the following report will show.
When the Western Association was organized in 1848, this Church
reported an increase for year: By baptism 33, by letter 16, restored
3. Total increase 52. Total membership 455. Contributions for
Denominational Funds £27 11s. 8 1/2d. ($110.34).

Sunday School: No. of Schools 2, No. of Scholars 200, No. of Teachers
35, No. of Volumes 600, No. of Baptisms from Schools 25.

In 1849 the Sunday School reported 3 Schools, 320 Scholars, and 43
Teachers; while in 1850, after the separation, the numbers had fallen
to 1 School, 120 Scholars and 16 Teachers.

Brussels Street Building Dedicated.

The Brussels Street building was completed and dedicated on Sunday,
September 1st, 1849. Rev. Theodore S. Harding, who preached the
dedication sermon, contrasted the condition of the Baptists in the
city at that time with the past, it being forty-six years since he
had first visited the city. The Church, not being in circumstances to
settle a pastor at Brussels street, made temporary arrangements for
assistance by the pastors of the Portland and Carleton churches.

The Associational letter from this Church August, 1849, refers to the
time when Father Pettingill opened a prayer meeting in 1808, with
only three praying brothers to assist him, and says: “Since then
eight Baptist places of worship have been erected in the City and its
environs, through the agency of this Church which grew from these
feeble beginnings. The most of these churches were supplied at the
time with the faithful preaching of God’s word. The records of the
Church for the previous ten years show additions by baptism and
letter of 600; but the loss by death, dismissals, removals and
exclusions left the church at that time with a membership of 334.”
Brussels Street Church Formed.

The plan of Associate Pastors for Germain and Brussels streets not
working very well, in 1859 the church decided to separate. This was
carried by a vote of 57 against 17. The division of the mother church
was made with the utmost harmony and good feeling on the part of all,
both pastor and people believing that the establishing of a separate
church at the other end of the city would lead to a more general
knowledge of Baptist doctrines and the consequent extension of the
Master’s Kingdom. Subsequent history has proved this belief to be
well founded. We quote from Dr. Bill’s sermon at the dedication of
the new building erected here in 1866: “This movement—the division of
the church—which we believe was of God, left us without pastor or
deacons. Instead of being discouraged, the Church rallied around the
standard of the banner of the Cross of Christ, which had been planted
here so many years, and directing their united efforts determined to
stand fast in the defense of the gospel, and maintain their rank and
standing. Unfurling to the breeze the folds of this banner, we went
forward proclaiming victory through the Blood of the Lamb, and
victory—blessed be God—has been ours.”

Readjustments.

Dr. Carey says: “The remnant clinging to this hallowed spot again
called Rev. J. G. Casewell to the pastorate, he having about this
time returned from England. The following brethren were elected
deacons: George A. Garrison, Edmund S. Barteaux, Dr. Simon Fitch and
Manuel Francis. Solomon Hersey was appointed treasurer, and G. A.
Garrison continued as clerk. The first report to the Association,
after the separation, gives the following information: Number
dismissed to Brussels street 158; to other churches 7, died 2,
leaving a membership of 167. This number was reduced by 27, who were
not in full fellowship, so that the real number of members was only
140. Contributions to the Denominational Funds: £27 14s. 7d.
($110.92.)

After the separation, this Church which had previously been known as
the First Baptist Church, was called the Germain Street Baptist
Church. This name it still retains, with the addition of the word
“United” which was added when the two branches of the Baptist family
in the Maritime Provinces became one.

Rev. Mr. Casewell had many warm friends and admirers, and it was
hoped that his splendid pulpit ability would soon gather a large
congregation. Hence, notwithstanding discouraging circumstances, the
members took hold with the united determination to exert themselves
to the utmost to build up the cause here. Old debts were paid and
arrangements were made for the support of the pastor and for the
general expenses of the Church. The burden fell quite heavily upon a
few, and some embarrassment was felt; but by united effort the
expenses were regularly met, and indications for the future were
favorable. In March, 1851, revival indications were manifested
especially among the young, and several professed conversion. Mr.
Casewell’s health having again failed, he left for England in 1851,
and on the voyage passed suddenly from time to eternity.

REV. DR. BILL’S PASTORATE, 1852-1863

——————

REV. I. E. BILL, of Nictaux, N. S., was the second pastor after the
separation. He came February, 1852, and continued till February,
1863. He labored faithfully and successfully in extending the
triumphs of the Gospel—not only in the pulpit but also through the
press, as editor of “The Christian Visitor.” During his pastorate of
eleven years more than 300 members were added to our number by
baptism, and by letter from sister churches. He was present at the
laying of the corner stone of the present building in 1877. He is
spoken of in the early days of his ministry in this city as one of
the most popular preachers of his time. His fluency of speech and
power of declamation made him a favorite preacher, and drew large
congregations to hear him.

Rev. I. E. Bill was born February 19th, 1805, at Cornwallis, N. S. He
was baptized by Rev. Edward Manning, and began to preach in 1837. He
was ordained at Nictaux in 1829, where he was pastor for over twenty
years, and was greatly blessed in his work—during the first year of
his pastorate baptizing 151 persons. He was a warm friend of Acadia
College and its affiliated institutions, and was present at the
founding of the Academy in 1828. In 1881 Acadia University conferred
on him the Degree of Doctor of Divinity. He established the first
Ladies’ Boarding School at Nictaux in 1846. He was a pastor of
Germain Street Church 1852 to 1863. After resigning the pastorate of
this Church, he preached in Fredericton, St. Martins and other
places. Dr. Saunders says “He was an extraordinary man and
minister—loving and beloved. His ‘Fifty Years with the Baptists’ is a
monument.” He dies at St. Martins, August 4th, 1891, aged eighty-six
years.

Dr. Gates in preaching his funeral sermon says: “You can know with
what attachment Dr. Bill was bound to this Church, when you recall
the fact that he retained his membership here until the last, and it
is this Church that now reports another of its members passed into
the land—‘where sweeps no desolating wind.’” Dr. Gates in concluding
says: “Have you not known him; have you not heard him eloquently
pleading for the higher education; have you not listened to him as
with tender pathos he had pleaded for the millions of the perishing
in the heathen lands; have you not listened at with burning words he
denounced the evils of the time; aye, too, have you not felt the
force, the power of his enthusiasm, his hopefulness as he has painted
in your presence in glowing colors the coming of the more blessed
days—the days of righteousness, of peace, of grace—days of the
reigning of Jesus Christ?”

In 1856 the membership of the Church was 229, and in 1860, 320.

In 1859 the Deacons were: G. A. Garrison, John Fisher, Manuel
Francis, E. J. Barteaux, E. H. Duval, and A. McL. Seely. This year we
find the New Year’s Conference Meeting referred to for the first
time. At the Annual Charity Sermon, the collection was £9.

It is to be regretted that owing to loss of the Records more of the
History of the Church during Dr. Bill’s pastorate is not available.
Dr. Bill himself in closing an historical sermon delivered in this
Church in 1863 said: “The remaining portion of the History includes
my own life and labors as pastor of this Church. We shall not go into
the subject at present, but at some future day, and in other hands,
it may be found to comprise a chapter not devoid of interest, as the
history of this Baptist Church is rich in incident as it is also rich
in suggestion and influence.”

REV. HENRY VAUGHAN’S PASTORATE, 1863-1864.

When Rev. I. E. Bill resigned, in 1863, Rev. Henry Vaughan, son of
Simon Vaughan, of St. Martins, was called to the pastorate and
entered upon his labors in March. He was a graduate of Acadia
University and Newton Theological Seminary, and was ordained at St.
George in 1862. He was a sound preacher and well qualified to fill
the pastoral office, and his friends looked forward to a long life of
usefulness in the Master’s service.

The Second Building.

The old Church, built in 1818, and enlarged in 1838, was out of date
and not in keeping with the progress of the city. It was therefore
resolved, in March, 1864, to erect in its place a substantial brick
building. To this work the pastor gave himself with untiring zeal and
unabated energy, contributing of his own means and obtaining
subscriptions from his relatives and friends to forward the
undertaking on which he has set his heart. The corner stone was to
have been laid on the 24th of August, but the pastor was suddenly
taken ill, and died on 14th of September, 1864. On the 22nd of
September the corner stone was laid with appropriate ceremonies, but
a shadow was thrown on the scene, for the loved and laborious pastor
was not there, but had gone to his rest and reward.

The vestry was completed and dedicated on the 6th of February, 1864,
when a discourse was delivered by Rev. I. E. Bill commemorative of
the life and work of the Rev. Henry Vaughan.. Mr. Vaughan is the only
pastor of this Church since its formation who has died while pastor.

The Church was completed in 1866, and was built of brick with cut
stone trimmings. It was of the Gothic style of architecture in use in
the early part of the fourteenth century, with some adaptations. It
had a frontage of fifty feet on Germain street, and seventy-five on
Queen. The entrance was through the tower in the centre of the
building and was surmounted by a portal pleasing to the eye. The
vestibule had a groined roof, and the ceiling of the main auditorium,
being supported by pillars, together with the Gothic roof, gave a
very pleasing appearance to the interior. There were galleries on
three sides of the church, the choir and the organ occupying the one
facing the minister. The main audience room was dedicated on the
second Sunday in November, 1866. It was a beautiful sanctuary,
commodious, homelike and pleasant, suggesting the words of the
Psalmist: “How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts.” The
Baptistry was in the Vestry, on the northern side of the room, the
platform being over it, and the seats arranged to face the same way.
Off the Vestry were the Parlor and Infant classrooms, in the same
positions as in the present building, while the library was in the
south-west corner. The cost of the building was $40,000.

The Parsonage faced on Germain street, and was built of wood, being
the building erected in 1840. In 1872 it was remodeled at a cost of
$1,400, and made very comfortable for the family of Rev. Dr. Carey.

REV. DR. CAREY’S PASTORATE, 1865-1881.

———————

REV. G. M. W. CAREY was invited to visit the city in August, 1865. He
came, preached for three Sundays, and received a unanimous call to
the pastorate. He accepted and entered upon his labors here on the
third Sunday in December, 1865.

Death of Rev. Samuel Robinson.

The death of Rev. Samuel Robinson occurred September 16th, 1886,
after long and successful pastorates in this and Brussels Street
Churches. For some twelve years he was pastor here, during which time
374 persons were added to our membership by baptism and 188 by
letter—a total of 562. At Brussels Street Church he labored from 1850
up to the time of his death—sixteen years—and was the means under God
of adding to the membership of our sister Church 456 by baptism and
191 by letter—647 in all. During his two pastorates in this city,
which covered the long term of twenty-seven years, he thus received
into the two Churches the large number of 1,209 persons. Mr. Robinson
probably did more than any other man of his time in extending Baptist
principles in this city and county, and his work was greatly blessed
by God.

Revival Services.

On January 17th, 1870, Elder Knapp, of Illinois, who had been invited
to the city by Germain and Leinster Street Churches, commenced
special services. The plan adopted was to meet alternately in each
church a week at a time, and hold united services. Elder Knapp’s
sermons were searching and powerful, striking terror to the hearts of
the ungodly, and convincing the backslider of his sinfulness and
bringing him back to the realization of his duty to God and the
Church. The meetings were largely attended, and a profound impression
was made on the minds of the unconverted. As a result of these
services 103 persons were added to the Church by baptism and by
letter.

Church Debt Paid.

A debt of $15,000 rested like a heavy burden upon the Church,
crippling its energies and hindering the out-flow of its benevolence.
This amount had been gradually reduced till in 1871—five years after
the completion of the edifice—there remained the sum of $6,400, which
was covered by a mortgage. This the young men of the Church resolved
to make an effort to have removed. A committee composed of James
Harrington, James S. Harding and Thomas D. Denham were appointed to
devise a plan to pay off this debt. They submitted a scheme for its
reduction by weekly payments of ten cents each member of the church.
So far as we can learn this is the first application of a Weekly
Offering system in this Church. At the end of two and a half years,
the committee reported that $2,000 had been raised and paid on the
mortgage. This so encouraged the Church that an effort was successful
made to secure larger subscriptions, and the entire debt was paid off
on Christmas eve, 1873. In doing this the Church was greatly indebted
to the generosity of Mr. Henry Vaughan, whose subscription and those
of his family and friends amounted to $1,700—over one-third of the
whole amount. It is believed that this was the first time in the
history of the Church when the property was entirely free from debt.
Now, in 1910, history is repeating itself.

Building Damaged by Fire.

On the 28th of January, 1874, at midnight, the Church was discovered
to be on fire, the building being considerably damaged, and the organ
completely destroyed. The amount of the award, $4,676, was, however,
sufficient to repair the damage. Various churches and halls were
offered for the use of the Church, till the building was repaired.
Among there were Brussels Street, Leinster Street, and Calvin
Churches, the Mechanics’ Institute, the Academy of Music and the Y.
M. C. A. The offer of the Y. M. C. A. was accepted, and their hall on
Charlotte street was used till the Church was ready for occupancy. On
the following Sunday the pastor preached a powerful sermon—alluding
to the loss by fire, and showing how much worse our condition would
have been, if the debt had not been paid off.

This year a finance committee composed of G. M. Steeves, J. J.
Bostwick and the writer was appointed to oversee the finances, and
enlist all members of the Church and congregation in this part of the
work. Feeling that the time was not ripe for the introduction of a
weekly offering system, they introduced a monthly one, and from this
time to the present full annual financial statements have been issued.

In February the pastor was granted leave of absence to visit Great
Britain. He left in April and returned in August much improved in
health. On his return, he delivered in several places a most
interesting lecture on the “Westminster Abbey.”

In 1874, a Mission Sunday School was started at Portland Bridge, with
a view to looking after the neglected children in the vicinity of
York Point. J. J. Forest was the first Superintendent and was
followed J. J. Bostwick, with whom the writer was associated.

The Young People’s Meeting was organized in 1876, largely through the
efforts of Brother E. H. Jones. This same year permission was given
the Fire Department to connect the Fire Alarm with the Church bell.

On June 13th, 1877, a beautiful Communion Service was presented to
the Church by Deacon and Mrs. Dyall.

Church Destroyed by Fire.

June 20th, 1877, is a memorable day in the history of this city, as
on that day two-thirds of the main part of the city was wiped out by
fire. Our Church in common with all others in the burnt district was
entirely destroyed, leaving only a picturesque ruin as shown in the
oil painting by Mr. J. C. Miles, and in the frontispiece of Stewart’s
“Story of the Fire.”

Nothing was saved from the building but the new communion service,
and this only by the persistent effort of Mrs. Dyall. The bell, the
gift of Captain George W. Marsters, was found embedded in the ashes,
this being the second time for it to receive its Baptism by Fire. It
was shipped to the founders in England and recast, and is still in
use at the present time.

On Sunday, June 24th, the Church met for worship with the Brussels
Street Church. Invitations were received from Brussels Street and
Calvin Churches, and from Peerless Lodge and Odd Fellows to make use
of their new buildings. The new Portland Bridge Mission Building was
nearly completed, and available for the use of the Church.

The offer of Brussels Street Church was accepted, and we united with
them till their new pastor, Rev. A. J. Wilcox, arrived, when the
Sunday evening service was held in Calvin Presbyterian Church, the
week-night meetings being held in the Mission Hall.

At a meeting held June 26th, a letter was read from Charlottetown
Baptist Church, enclosing a draft of $450, to be divided between this
and Leinster Street Churches. This was the first contribution towards
rebuilding and was highly appreciated. It was our privilege in turn
in 1889 to assist this church to a small extent, when their building
was destroyed by fire.

While the new edifice was in course of construction, this Church and
Leinster Street united in sending Rev. J. D. Pope to England and
Scotland, and Rev. G. M. W. Carey to the Upper Provinces and the
United States, to raise funds to assist the two Churches in
rebuilding. The net result from their efforts, after deducting
expenses, was $5,221, which was divided equally between the two
Churches.

The Third Building Erected.

In order to provide additional accommodation in the new building, the
Church purchased from Deacon Francis the adjoining lot on Queen
street, giving us 100 x 120 feet in all.

At the laying of the corner stone of the present building the
following ministers, besides the pastor, were present and took part
in the ceremony: Revs. Dr. I. E. Bill, J. P. Parsons, W. P. Everitt,
and A. J. Wilcox. The ceremony, which was very impressive, commenced
by the choir singing the hymn:

“How pleasant, how divinely fair,
O Lord of Hosts Thy dwellings are!”

Dr. Carey concluded the reading of the corner stone document with
these words:—“And now perplexed, but not in despair; cast down, but
not destroyed; with faith and trust in the God of Bethel, our
fathers’ God and our God, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, on this
Tuesday afternoon, second of October, 1877, in the forty-first year
of her Majesty’s reign, and the eleventh year of the Dominion of
Canada, Earl Dufferin, Governor General, and the Hon. S. L. Tilley,
Lieutenant Governor of New Brunswick, the ninety-second year of the
incorporation of St. John, and the sixty-eighth of the Germain Street
Baptist Church, we lay this corner stone with the fervent prayer and
aspiration that the spiritual glory of the Temple now being raised
may far surpass the glory of the former temples which have risen on
this site.”

The following were placed in a tin box and deposited in the corner
stone:—Documents taken from the ruins of the former building; List of
Officers, August 24th, 1864; Statement of Pastorates of Revs. I. E.
Bill and Henry Vaughan; Names of the Founders, Organizers and Pastors
of the Church; List of Officers and present number of Members;
Statement of the Sunday School before the Fire; Baptist Hand Book of
New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island; Copies of The
Christian Visitor; Silver coins—5, 10, 25 and 50 cents Dominion
Currency; together with the documents read at the laying of the
present corner stone.

On Sunday, February 24th, 1878, we met for worship for the first time
in the vestry of the new Church. The pastor being detained at
Annapolis, on account of a storm, Rev. George Armstrong preached in
the morning and Rev. Dr. Watters, of St. David’s Church, in the
evening.

Dedication of the Church.

The main audience room of the Church was opened on the 11th of
August, and dedicated to the worship of the Triune God, with
appropriate services. Rev. Dr. I. E. Bill, a former pastor, preached
in the morning from Acts 20: 35—“Remember the words of the Lord
Jesus, how He said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’” He
spoke earnestly and impressively on the duty of giving liberally so
as to place the Church as soon as possible in the same position
financially as previous to the Fire, when there was not one cent of
incumbrance on the property. The pastor preached in the evening from
Haggai 2: 18, 19—“From the day that the foundation of the Lord’s
temple was laid, from this day will I bless you.” Dr. Carey concluded
as follows: “From this day may the blessing of God rest upon the
place and the people, the worshippers and their work, and may the
glory of the latter house be greater than that of the former. May
spiritual and temporal prosperity abide and abound on it, and may it
be an earthly palace for the Prince of Peace.” The house is tasteful
and commodious, with a seating capacity of about 850. It was the
first church edifice completed after the fire. In April of this year,
the hour of evening service was changed from 6 to 7 o’clock.

From Associational Letter, 1879.

“The total cost of Church and Parsonage, including organ and
furnishings was $46,000, of which $30,000 has been paid, including
$4,000 contributed this spring by for liberal members of the church
and congregation. This leaves a debt of $16,000. Additions during the
year: by baptism 14, by letter 4, reinstated 1. Loss: by death 3,
dismissed 3. Present Membership 474. Attendance at Young People’s
Meeting during the winter, fully 100. At Portland Bridge Mission the
average attendance at the Sunday School was 90, and on Sunday
evenings from 300 to 400. Our Licentiate, Brother John F. Newton,
spent his vacation laboring in this field, and his work was highly
appreciated. Brother W. F. Parker, (now Rev. W. F. Parker) spent his
vacation working among the colored people at Spar Cove, and was
blessed in his work. Our Sunday School has been in a prosperous
condition during the year, though still not as large as previous to
the fire. Number of Scholars, 170, Teachers, 18. Volumes in Library,
250.”

Rev. John F. Burditt.

Upon the completion of Brother Burditt’s theological course, he
volunteered for Missionary work in India, whither he proceeded under
the American Baptist Foreign Missionary Board. At first associated
with Dr. Downie, at Nellore, while studying the language, he later
founded a mission in a new field at Udayagiri, where he was
successful in building up a very flourishing church. After ten years
of unremitting labor he returned home on furlough. Upon his return to
India he was stationed at Narsarapette, where three years later he
died of typhoid fever, in 1894—a martyr to his too strenuous
endeavors in the cause of Christ. Thus has our church had the honor
of sending out laborers into the Master’s Vineyard.

Rev. Dr. Carey’s Resignation.

Rev. G. M. W. Carey having resigned the pastorate, and accepted a
call from the Princess Gate Baptist Church, Liverpool, Eng., preached
his farewell sermon, March 6th, 1881. The house was filled to
overflowing and many were turned away. Dr. Carey preached a powerful
sermon from Acts 20: 26-27, 31-32. Both preacher and congregation
were visibly affected during the discourse. On March 11th the
farewell meeting was held, and despite a heavy rainstorm the church
was completely filled. Besides the members of the congregation there
were present representatives of the various denominations of the city
to say farewell to one who by his faithful work, not only in his own
Church and denomination, but in all departments of Christian work, as
well as by his kindly manner and upright character, had won the
respect and love of all with whom he had brought into contact. As a
slight token of appreciation, handsome presents in silver and a
beautiful French marble clock were presented to Dr. and Mrs. Carey.
During his pastorate of fifteen years, Dr. Carey had preached fifteen
hundred sermons, baptized three hundred persons, solemnized three
hundred marriages, and delivered one hundred and fifty lectures.

Rev. G. M. W. Carey was born in Belfast, Ireland, March 10th, 1829.
He received his early education at the Moravian Village, Grace Hill,
Belfast, and when a boy came to Canada with his parents. He attended
the Grammar School at Vankleek, Ont., and at the University of
Rochester, N. Y., took the Degree of B. A. and M. A. from Acadia
University, as well as from the Baptist College, Toronto. He also
held a certificate from the University of Chicago for having
successfully completed the advanced course in Hebrew, and in 1894 the
Honorary Degree of D. D. was conferred by Acadia. He was ordained
after his graduation from Rochester, and was pastor of the Queen
Street Baptist Church, St. Catherines, Ont., for ten years. He then
came to St. John, and labored successfully with this Church for
fifteen years—1865-188. He was then called to the Princess Gate
Church of Liverpool, England, where he remained four years. Returning
to Canada, he was pastor at Brantford and Ottawa, Ont., for some
years, when he returned to St. John, having accepted the pastorate of
the Brussels Street Church of this city—remaining from 1839 till
1899. He then went to Ottawa, where at his daughter’s home,
surrounded by his wife and family, he lay down to rest, and in his
sleep passed peacefully away—in just such manner, as he himself had
often expressed the desire that his passion might be.

Dr. Carey was one of the most eloquent preachers who have filled this
pulpit, and drew large congregations, especially to the evening
services. As a lecturer also he was very popular—his lectures on
“The Making and Ministry of Money,” always drew crowded houses, and
were delivered for the benefit of various churches and societies. His
genial manner and exemplary Christian character endeared him to all
classes in the community. He was a true optimist, and looked forward
to a confederation of the English Speaking Peoples of the globe, to
promote religion, learning, commerce and peace.

REV. W. M. WEEKS’ PASTORATE.

On the 8th of April, 1881, Mr. William M. Weeks, the pastor elect,
was ordained by a Council called for that purpose, and inducted into
the pastorate. This year revised rules of order were reported by a
committee, and adopted by the Church. During the year the debt was
reduced $1,600, of which amount $300 was raised by the Ladies’ Mite
Society. The Weekly Offering system, which is still in use, was also
adopted. At the end of a year Brother Weeks resigned the pastorate
and returned to the United States.

PASTORATE OF REV. HENRY CROSS.

On the 24th of March, 1882, a call was extended to Rev. Henry Cross.
He accepted and entered upon his duties on Easter Sunday. A formal
recognition service was held May 11th, at which Rev. Dr. I. E. Bill
was chairman, and representatives of the city churches were present.

Y. P. S. C. E. Organized.

On February 12th, 1883, the Young People’s Society of Christian
Endeavor was formed and took the place of the Young People’s Meeting,
which has been held regularly since 1876. The following were the
first officers: T. D. Denham, President; F. W. Wigmore,
Vice-President; W. C. Cross, Secretary; Donaldson Hunt, Treasurer. To
Deacon T. S. Simms is due the organization of this society—the first
to be formed in Canada. It was only two years previous that the first
society had been organized by Rev. Francis Clark, the father of the
Christian Endeavor movement. Brother Simms brought from Portland the
idea of this organization, and a copy of the constitution of the
parent society. He was anxious to start a branch here, in which he
was warmly supported by the pastor. Shortly after the formation of
the Society there were 24 Active and 29 Associate Members, Total 53.
In 1896 the membership had increased to 171 Active, and 18 Associate,
Total 189.

In February, 1904, The Coming of Age Anniversary of the society was
held, and again in 1908 the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary was celebrated
in an appropriate manner, on which occasion an Historical Sketch of
the Society was prepared and read by Donaldson Hunt. At the present
time (1910) there are upon the roll some 120 Active, and 40 Associate
Members—Chas. R. Wasson, President. An interesting feature of the
work of the Society at the present time is the supporting by the
members of a native helper in India.

During the twenty-seven years of its existence this society has
proved a great help to the younger members of the church, and we
trust will continue to do so.

Our brother, E. H. Jones, who had been for some years an active
member of this church, having completed his course at Newton and been
appointed by the American Baptist Foreign Missionary Board as a
Missionary to Japan, was ordained to the ministry August 19th, 1884,
by a Council convened in this Church. Rev. W. F. Parker, who as a
young Christian worker in this Church had been associated with
Brother Jones in the work here, preached the ordination sermon.
Towards the close of Dr. Gates’ pastorate Brother Jones made a short
visit to the city, being home on furlough, after which he returned to
Japan, where he has been laboring for over a quarter of a century.

At the annual meeting in January, 1885, Rev. Henry Cross resigned the
pastorate after three years’ service with us. He preached his
farewell sermon Sunday, March 22nd.

Rev. Henry Cross was born at Beeston, Nottinghamshire, England,
December 12th, 1840. When a boy he was sent to private schools in his
native village, and in his youth he attended a college at Nottingham
four miles distance from his home. Mr. Cross was baptized into the
fellowship of the Baptist Church at Beeston, March 4th, 1855. At the
age of seventeen years the Church granted him a license to preach,
and he was known throughout his native country as the “boy preacher.”
In 1858 he entered the Baptist college at Nottingham, now known as
the Midland Baptist College, from which he graduated in the spring of
1863. On graduating from college he became the pastor of the White
Friars Lane Baptist Church, Coventry, which he served for eleven
years.

Mr. Cross left Coventry for the United States in 1874 and received a
call to the pastorate of the First Baptist Church, St. Paul, Minn.,
in 1874, where he remained for four years. In 1879 he became the
pastor of the Pilgrim Baptist Church, New York City. He resigned this
pastorate in August, 1881, on account of his broken-down condition
caused by the death of his wife.

In the spring of 1882 Mr. Cross accepted a call to the pastorate of
the Germain Street Baptist Church, St. John, N. B. In 1886 he became
pastor of the Baptist Church in Manasquan and served the Baptist
Church there for nine years longer, until 1905, when he retired from
the active pastorate making his home in Red Bank, New Jersey, where
he is still engaged in preaching the Word as opportunity presents.

While without a pastor the pulpit was supplied by Revs. T. S. McCall,
of Toronto, and J. W. A. Stewart, of Hamilton.

The report to the Association in 1885 says: “For a long time it has
been our privilege to have one or more brethren licensed to preach
the Gospel. Among them our Brother Deacon E. H. Duval was for many
years a standard bearer, till his Master called him home. Then came
Brother J. F. Burditt, now a missionary in India; Brother W. F.
Parker, now pastor at Woodstock; Brother George F. Jenkins, at
present pastor of a church in Maine, and Brother E. H. Jones, now a
missionary in Japan.”

DR. GATES’ PASTORATE, 1886-1900.

—————

In September, 1885, the Church extended a call to Rev. G. O. Gates.
He accepted, and entered upon his duties on New Year’s Day, 1886,
being present at the Annual Conference Meeting. On the following
Sunday he preached to large and attentive audiences. At the close of
the evening service Rev. Dr. Goodspeed on behalf of the Church
extended the right hand of fellowship to the new pastor and his wife.
A recognition service was held January 19th, at which there were
present Reverends Goodspeed, Cahill, Bruce, Shawffield, Stewart,
Gordon, Spencer, Hopper and Saer. Dr. Goodspeed, who presided,
welcomed Brother Gates to the pastorate and said “Though Mr. Gates
had never preached here before, and was known to the Church by
reputation only, a record is better than any fugitive effort in the
way of preaching,” Mr. Cahill, in his address to the pastor, said
“Your obligation is to fill the pulpit, but the obligation of the
members is to fill the pews.”

Reduction of the Debt.

This same year the church was encouraged by the gift of $200 from Mr.
Jacob Bradshaw, which they resolved to place in the Savings Bank to
form the nucleus of a Sinking Fund, for the purpose of paying off the
debt on the Church property. In 1879 quarterly collections were
commenced for this purpose by means of envelopes. This plan has been
continued, but the payments made monthly, and the mortgage reduced
$1,000 every second year.

In 1888 our hearts were cheered by the generous donation of Mrs.
James Dyall of $1,000 towards the reduction of the debt. At her death
in 1892 she also left the residue was reduced $4,600—this amount
being made up by the first payment on the bequest of the late Mrs.
Dyall $3,603, a rebate of $500 from the estate of the late J. H.
Moran, and the balance from the Sinking Fund.

The total amount received by the Church from the estate of Mrs. Dyall
was $7,160, all of which was applied towards the reduction of debt.

In 1887 the Sunday School and all Societies in the Church were at
their request placed under the direct control of the Church, and have
since reported to the Annual Meeting. This year, also, the Roll was
thoroughly revised and the active memberships reduced to 257, the
non-resident members being placed on a separate list.

Mission Founded.

In February, 1889, a Mission was founded in the North End of the City
by W. C. Cross and others associated with him. At first held in a
room in the rear of a grocery store on Sheriff street it soon outgrew
its early quarters, and in the fall of the same year a building was
erected on Murray street, at a cost of about $750, whence its present
name—“The Murray Street Mission.” The large majority of the workers
have always come from Germain Street Church. In addition to the
regular Sunday School at 9.30 a.m., a week-evening prayer meeting has
been conducted during a large part of the time. At present, Chas. R.
Wasson is Superintendent, with L. W. Simms and W. E. Roop as
Assistant Superintendents.

In 1890 Dr. Gates was offered the position of Secretary of the
Foreign Mission Board—a position he was eminently qualified to fill,
but at the earnest solicitation of the Church he declined the
appointment.

In 1892 Brothers William Lewis, C. C. Parker, and J. H. Wasson were
elected Deacons.

On January 5th, 1894, was held the Roll Call of the Church, the
number on the roll being 436, 277 resident and 159 non-resident. Of
the resident list, while 13 sent word that they were unable to be
present through sickness, or absence from the city. Of the
non-resident members, 10 reported verbally and 11 by letter.

1895 was a year when as a result of faithful planting of the seed of
truth by the pastor and others a large in-gathering occurred. We
reported to the Association: “Additions by baptism 77, by letter 20,
by experience 2, total 99. Present Membership 461.” At the Communion
service in April, 59 new members received the right hand of
fellowship.

This year the Convention held its Fiftieth Anniversary with this
Church, where it will be recalled its first meeting had been held.
Our contributions to the Denominational objects amounted to $902 this
year, and in 1897 $1,200. This contrasts favorably with 1887, when
only $281 was raised for these objects.

Rev. Louis Duval.

In 1895 Brother Louis was licensed to preach. After completing his
course at Acadia University and Newton Theological Seminary, our
Brother and his wife went to Africa to labor for the Master.
Returning home on furlough in 1909, he remained about nine months,
and has since returned to his work in the Great Dark Continent, where
he has had the experience of erecting a Church upon this—one of the
outposts of the great Master’s Kingdom. His first boy convert is now
studying to prepare himself for the ministry to his fellowmen.

Dr. Gates’ Trip to the Orient.

After faithful service with the Church for over twelve years the
pastor was granted six months leave of absence to visit the Holy
Land, Egypt and Europe. A farewell service was held March 9th, 1898,
which was largely attended. An address was presented prepared by Dr.
S. McCully Black from which we quote—“We remember tonight with
grateful hearts the large blessings which have come to the Church
under your ministry; we could call to mind the glad and joyous
experience which by the favor of God we have been permitted to enjoy
together; the pleasant fellowship which has characterized all our
meetings; the blessing of the Sanctuary; the peace and harmony which
have prevailed in the Church; the seasons of special blessing which
have been enjoyed; the large number that you have been permitted to
baptize and welcome to the fellowship of the Church; the enlargement
of the Church benevolence and its increasing interest in all our
Denominational work; the training of the young; the growth of the
Sunday School and of Local Mission work, and the general enlargement
of the Church’s activity.” To the address Dr. Gates made a feeling
reply.

On the return of Dr. Gates from the east, and of Mrs. Gates from
Great Britain, whither she had gone to meet him, a welcome service
was held on the evening of September 8th, when an informal address
was presented. Dr. Gates in reply spoke at some length of his trip,
especially of his experiences in the Holy Land. All were glad to
welcome Dr. and Mrs. Gates back and to find them looking so well, and
the opinion was expressed that as a result of his six months’
vacation, the pastor had added more than as many years to his life.

Shortly after his return the pastor commenced a series of twelve
sermons on the Holy Land. These were highly interesting and
instructive, and the desire to hear them so general that the Church
was packed to its utmost capacity and still many were unable to gain
admission. At the close of the sermon on “The Holy City—Within the
Walls,” Professor L. W. Titus sang very acceptably “The Holy City.”

The Sunday School.

In 1899 a number of the young men purchased the lot of land adjoining
the church property on Germain street—50 x 190 feet—at a cost of
$1,680. This they transferred to the Trustees to the Church for the
purpose of ultimately erecting a Sunday School building thereon.

In the same year Deacon T. S. Simms resigned as superintendent of the
Sunday School—a position which he had filled most acceptably for the
long period of twenty-five years. Upon his retirement, W. C. Cross
was elected as superintendent, and has held this office since that
time. At present our Sunday School is in a very flourishing
condition. In the main school, the enrollment shows 8 Officers, 28
Teachers and 270 Scholars. A feature of our Sunday School work has
been the large amount raised by the scholars for Missionary purposes,
at least $100 per year having been contributed by our Scholars during
the last seven years to the Glendinning Fund.

In 1900 Brothers W. H. Colwell, S. H. Davis, and W. C. Cross, were
elected deacons.

Resignation of Dr. Gates.

At the end of 1900 Dr. gates tendered his resignation of the
pastorate he had so acceptably filled for the previous fifteen years,
and the Church was reluctantly compelled to accept it, Dr. Gates
feeling that it was his duty to accept the call from the Windsor
Church. A proposition made by the ladies, and heartily supported by
the entire Church, was for Dr. Gates to take a year’s rest from the
pastorate, and at the end of this time again take up his work
here—the Church to provide for supply. All efforts however, to induce
him to reconsider the matter were in vain, as he had accepted the
call from Windsor immediately after tendering his resignation.

In closing his farewell sermon Dr. Gates said: “There is no spot in
the Old World of the New so dear to me as the City of the Loyalists,
by the side of old Fundy. I love its streets, its bracing air, and
the push and energy of its citizens. There is no better place in the
world for a man who loves the work, and no city on the continent
where the great heart of Christianity beats truer for what is good
and pure and holy. I do not know why I am going, but I have said I am
going and I expect to go. They say that a tree which has been long
rooted in one place will not grow in a stranger soil. If this be so,
maybe I shall return. I am doing what I feel I ought to do, and who
can oppose God’s leading?”

One of the city papers referring to Dr. Gates said: “As a preacher he
is unsurpassed by any in the city, and as a citizen his personal
popularity extends far beyond the bounds of his Church and
Denomination, and his departure will be keenly felt.” An address,
engrossed on parchment by T. H. Belyea, and bound in Morocco, was
presented to Dr. Gates by the Church; and a purse towards fitting up
his library by the ladies.

REV. J. D. FREEMAN’S PASTORATE.

A call was extended to Rev. J. D. Freeman March 1st, 1901. Brother
Freeman accepted the call, and preached here for the first time on
Sunday, April 21st. On the 18th of April a recognition service was
held to welcome our new pastor to the Church and City. Deacon Simms
on behalf of the Church extend a hearty welcome to Mr. and Mrs.
Freeman. Rev. Ira Smith cordially welcomed him to the city on behalf
of the Baptist Churches, and Rev. Dr. Read on behalf of the
Evangelical Alliance. In responding, Mr. Freeman expressed his
fraternal feelings towards the other denominations, which as he
increased in experience he thought more and more highly of; while at
the same time his attachment to his own grew stronger. It was his
desire to give himself fully to the service of Christ, in the Church
and in the community. At the close of his first Sunday service, the
pastor baptized two young members.

In 1902 extensive repairs costing $2,700, were made to the walls of
the Church, which put the building in first-class condition. This
year the Roll of membership was revised with the following result:
Resident Members 351, Non-Resident 102, Total 453.

In May, 1902, Mr. Freeman resigned and left in July, after a short
pastorate of fifteen months.

A farewell social was held in the vestry July 3rd and an address
presented from which we quote: “Especially were we impressed with the
importance of your ministry in respect to preaching of the Gospel.
Your interpretations of the truth has been marked by deep spiritual
insight and fine powers of analysis, and the expression of it has
been rich, full and strong—a constant inspiration and incentive to
spiritual meditation and Christian living.” On the following Sunday
the farewell sermon was preached from Phil. 3:14. After delivering an
able and thoughtful discourse, Mr. Freeman said: “A farewell word.
Let it be brief as befits the brevity of my ministry with you. Yet I
cannot forget that I am saying ‘Good Bye’ tonight to the goodly
fellowship of Baptists in these Maritime Provinces. They have been
good to me and I love them. They have given me a large place to work
among them, and I have been proud to occupy it to the best of my
ability. I could have been happy in the thought of further years of
service in the ranks of the ministry of these Provinces by the Sea.

“Eight of the best years of my life I have been permitted to work
within a day’s journey of the place where I was born. No people can
ever be quite so dear to me as these. And now, dear people of this
Church, let me publicly thank you for all your co-operation and
loving appreciation from the first day even until now.”

Rev John D. Freeman was born in Queens County, N. S. He took his B.
A. at McMaster University and his M. A. at Acadia. He has been pastor
at Guelph and Whitby, Ont.; at Fredericton, and Germain Street. N.
B., at Bloor Street, Toronto; and is now pastor of a very old church
at Leicester, England, being only the third pastor the church has had
during the past one hundred years.

Since leaving the city Mr. Freeman has published two devotional
works—“Life on the Uplands” and “Concerning the Christ.” These have
had a large circulation and have been greatly prized for their purity
of diction, elevated style, and spiritual insight.

DR. GATES RECALLED.

———————

ON MR. FREEMAN’S departure in July, 1902, Dr. Gates received a most
unanimous call to return to the city and again take up the work of
the pastorate of this Church. At the Conference meeting held August
1st, Dr. Gates’ letter of acceptance was received with great
satisfaction, which was expressed by all rising and singing the
doxology.

Dr. Gates resumed his work here on Sunday, November 2nd, when he
preached to large congregations both morning and evening. The evening
service was based on Acts 13:26—“To you is the word of this salvation
sent.” Preceding the sermon, Dr. Gates expressed his gladness at
returning to those whom he had learned to love in other days. He
thanked them for all their goodness, and asked that their prayers
might be offered for him, that while he was a citizen of St. John he
might so labor together with them, that the city might be the better
and more as God wanted it to be. He was proud of the City of St.
John, No one could go away from it, as he had done, after working
among its people for many years, and return without the feeling of
being home again, and the inclination to whisper a benediction over
the place. On the following Wednesday evening Dr. and Mrs. Gates were
warmly welcomed back by a largely attended Church social. Deacon
Simms, who presided, said it was seventeen years since Dr. Gates
first took charge of the Church. Now after an absence of nearly two
years, he returned to a united, well organized Church in a good
financial condition. He pledged the hearty support of the
congregation. He also warmly welcomed Mr. Gates, who is held in love
and esteem by all. Dr. Gates expressed great pleasure in resuming the
pastorate that had been very dear to him. There were many reasons
that it made pleasant, chief among which were the confidence shown to
him by Church and people, and because he regarded this as an ideal
city in the various relations in life, particularly
interdenominational harmony, and because that in coming back he felt
he had done what the Lord wished. During the evening the Sunday
School Orchestra played several selections.

In January, 1903, the following additions to membership during the
previous year were reported:—by baptism 17, by letter 5, by
experience 1, total 23. Present membership 582. Received and expended
for all for all purposes, $8,508.

In 1904 the Church adopted the Canadian Edition of The Baptist Hymnal
for use at the Sunday services, which has given very general
satisfaction.

Maritime Baptist Union.

At a meeting of the Church held September, 1904, the pastor gave an
interesting account of the movement for the union of the Baptist and
Free Baptist Churches from its inception up to that time, and
presented the following resolution: “Resolved—That the Germain Street
Church is prepared to enter into organic union with the Free Baptist
Churches of New Brunswick, on the Basis of Union as adopted by the
Convention held in Truro, August, 1904, and by the Free Baptist
Conference, September, 1904.” This was unanimously adopted.

A very large measure of credit in the progress of this movement is to
be accorded to Dr. Gates, who by his energetic and strenuous
endeavors as Chairman of the Union Committee, representing the
Baptists, may be said to have been greatly instrumental in
consummating the Union of these two branches of the one Body.

At the formal Uniting Service, held in Main Street Church, City, on
October 10th, 1905, a History of the Union Movement during the past
twenty years, from the standpoint of the committee appointed by the
Baptists, was appropriately read by Dr. Gates; while on the same
occasion a History of the Union Movement, from the standpoint of the
committee appointed by the Free Baptists, was presented by Dr. McLeod.

During the latter part of February, 1905, Dr. A. C. Dixon, of the
Ruggles Street Baptist Church, Boston, spent four days with us
assisting the pastor in holding special Evangelistic meetings. These
were held each afternoon and evening. Dr. Dixon’s exposition of
Scripture was powerful and convincing, though clothed in the plainest
language, and arrested and held the attention of thoughtful men and
women, not only of our own congregation but from other churches as
well. As a result of these meetings, which were continued after Dr.
Dixon left, there were a number of additions to our membership,
including nearly thirty from the Sunday School.

Men’s League.

In September of this year was formed the Men’s League, an
organization of the men of the congregation to meet for a half-hour’s
Bible study, during the fall and winter months, at the conclusion of
the morning service. To T. S. Simms is to be given the credit of
initiating the movement. Since its organization it has met regularly,
under the efficient leadership of Mr. E. M. Sipprell, and has been
productive of much interest in the study of the Word. During the
winter months also a programme of Social and Literary evenings has
been prepared and a Banquet held.

Dr. Gates’ Resignation.

On Sunday, the 11th of February, 1906, to the infinite regret of the
Church, the pastor’s resignation was read, in which he said: “In
reaching this decision I trust I have been guided by the Spirit of
God. Never will there come a day—be my earthly stay longer or
shorter—when this dear old Church will be out of my mind. The Lord
bless you all—your homes, your loved ones, these Church interests,
and prosper you much more in the days to come even than in the past.”
At a special meeting called to consider the pastor’s resignation,
Deacon Simms referred to Dr. Gates’ long pastorate, the Church’s
appreciation of him as pastor and preacher, and the regret felt at
the termination of the cordial relations which have existed between
us. As Dr. Gates’ letter left but one of course open to the Church,
it was therefore moved—that the resignation be accepted, and a
committee be appointed to draw up a suitable resolution.

On Sunday, April 1st, Dr. Gates preached his farewell sermon, the
Church being filled to the doors. He took for his text Isaiah 60:
1—“Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, saith your God.” At the close
of the sermon Dr. G. U. Hay read a farewell address to the pastor,
from which we quote: “Beloved pastor—twenty years ago last January
you came to St. John to be our pastor, and during the intervening
years with the exception of twenty-two months spent at Windsor, N.
S., you have lovingly and faithfully ministered to this church and
congregation. It is no easy task to break asunder ties that have been
binding us together during these happy years—years of large-hearted
and unselfish ministry on your part, and something, let us hope, of
grateful appreciation on ours. The steady increase in our Church and
congregation, the activity in all departments of work, and the
flourishing condition of our Church in late years are due to your
inspiring personality and earnest diligence, and in a marked degree
to your power of organization which has been a constant influence in
every department of Church work. Be assured that you name will remain
as a household word with us. May our Father in Heaven guide and
direct you as he has done in the past and may you be a blessing to
the Church to which you go, such as you have been to us, is our
earnest wish and prayer.” In reply Dr. Gates thanked the Church on
behalf of himself and Mrs. Gates for the many kindly services
rendered them. “I thought,” he said, “when I came back from Windsor
that I would be here for the rest of my life, but the fog of the last
two summers got the better of me and I had to do one of two things,
either give up the fog or preaching. I did not want to give up
preaching, so I was compelled to try a dryer climate.”

At the close of the Friday evening prayer meeting a certified cheque
to the retiring pastor, and to Mrs. Gates a diamond brooch, were
presented as slight reminders of the affection of the people among
whom they had labored so long.

Rev. G. O. Gates was born in Annapolis Valley, N. S. At the age of
eighteen he commenced teaching school. After a course at Horton
Academy he entered Acadia College, where he took his B. A. in 1873,
graduating at the head of his class. A few years later he took the M.
A. Degree in course. During his college course, he did missionary
work in Colchester County, also spending one summer in Amherst as
assistant to Dr. Steel. In his senior year he supplied the church at
Gaspereaux. In the autumn of 1873 he was called to the pastorate of
the church at Liverpool, remaining there until June, 1880; when he
went to the First Church at Moncton where he remained until the
autumn of 1885. In January, 1886, he came to this Church, remaining
for fifteen years; when he went to Windsor, being there nearly two
years. Returning to this Church, he was with us nearly three years
longer, when he went to Westmount, P. Q., in 1906, having been there
since that time. During his pastorate in this Church he spent six
months travelling in Palestine and Egypt, and visiting the principal
cities of Europe. While in St. John, Acadia University honored him by
conferring the Degree of Doctor of Divinity.

Dr. Gates has had a large measure of success in the ministry. During
one year at Moncton, one hundred and forty were added to the church,
and while here, there was a steady increase of members, including a
large number from the Sunday School. He has always taken a deep
interest in Sunday School and Missionary work, working in connection
with the Provincial Sunday School Association, and was for
twenty-five years an active member of the Foreign Mission Board.

At the present time he is President of the Grande Ligne Mission and
is also President of the Sunday School Association of the Province of
Quebec. In all his pastorates Dr. Gates has proved himself an earnest
and faithful worker, not only in his own Church and denomination, but
in every department of work having for its object the advancement of
the cause of Christ at home and abroad. We have been pleased to have
him with us taking part in the Centennial exercises of this Church,
which he loves so well.

REV. W. W. McMASTER’S PASTORATE.

On May 4th, 1906, a call was extended to Rev. W. W. McMaster. He
accepted and entered upon his duties on Sunday, August 5th.

In March, 1907, special meetings were held, the pastor being assisted
by Rev. W. F. Alton, of Sussex. Fourteen members of the Sunday School
were baptized and added to the membership of the Church.

In May, 1908, Brothers Donaldson Hunt and John P. Duval were elected
Deacons, and in August the Convention again met in this Church. This
year the time for holding the weekly prayer meeting was changed from
Friday to Wednesday evening. In November special services were held
for about three weeks, the pastor having the assistance of Rev. S. W.
Cummings, of Amherst, and some souls were born into the Kingdom.

During the last four Sundays of August, 1909, Union Services were
held with Queen Square Methodist Church, while the respective pastors
were on their vacations, the services being held in each church
alternately. On the first two Sundays Rev. G. O. Gates, D. D., of the
First Baptist Church, Westmount, Montreal, was the preacher; and on
the last two, Rev. W. G. Watson, B. D., of Mount Allison University.

Rev. S. McCully Black, M.A., D. D.

Upon August 23rd, 1909, occurred the death of Rev. S. McCully Black,
at his home in this city. For many years one of the prominent members
of our Church, he is still better known as for a period of nineteen
years the esteemed editor of the “Messenger and Visitor,” and, as it
has been more latterly called, “The Maritime Baptist.”

Dr. Black was born in Amherst, N. S., January 28th, 1846. His youth
was spent in Amherst, where he received his preliminary training at
the County Academy. In 1868 he entered Horton Academy. He was
graduated from Acadia University in 1874, and in 1876, after a
brilliant course of study, he received the Degree of B. A. from
Harvard University. His theological studies were pursued at Newton.
He held pastorates in Berwick, Liverpool, Westport and Kentville all
in Nova Scotia. In August, 1890, he was called to the editorial chair
of the “Messenger and Visitor,” which he filled with marked ability
until 1905 when, on the amalgamation of the “Messenger and Visitor”
and the “Religious Intelligencer,” he became senior editor of “The
Maritime Baptist,” in association with Rev. Dr. Joseph McLeod, and
continued as such until the time of his death.

——————

On October 17th, 1909, Rev. Mr. McMaster resigned from the pastorate,
the resignation to take effect upon the first Sunday of November.

Rev. W. W. McMaster is a native of England, and received his early
education there. Later he entered the McMaster University where he
graduated B. A., B. Th., in 1896. After serving three years as pastor
of the Baptist Church at Tiverton, Ontario, he was called in 1899 as
first pastor of the Fourth Avenue Church, Ottawa. During his seven
years at Ottawa, he was largely instrumental in building what is said
to be one of the most beautiful Baptist Churches in Canada. He was
pastor of this Church from May, 1906, to October, 1909, when he
resigned, shortly afterwards taking charge of the First Baptist
Church at Washington, D. C.

Annual Business Meeting, 1910.

At the Annual Business Meeting held January llth, 1910, the
Treasurer’s report showed receipts for 1909 from all sources
$10,613.00 and expenditure $10,603.00.

Included in the above expenditure is the following for Denominational
and other objects:

Additions during the past year: by baptism 3, by letter 3. Loss: by
death 9, by dismission 9. Present Membership 488.

CENTENNIAL EXERCISES.

——————

The Centennial Exercises of the Church were held May 22, 23, 24 and
25, 1910. All the meetings were largely attended and of a highly
interesting character. The Historical Sermon delivered Sunday morning
by Rev. G. O. Gates, covered the history of the Baptists of the
Maritime Provinces, during the past One Hundred Years. It was a very
able effort entailing a vast amount of research on the part of Dr.
Gates, who for an hour and a half held the close attention of an
audience which filled the auditorium to its utmost capacity.

At the Social and Reception to Dr. and Mrs. Gates, held Tuesday
evening, a number of the city pastors were present and delivered
brief addresses. At this meeting portraits of the late Deacon and
Mrs. Dyall, which had been presented to the Church by Mr. Robert
Ewing, were unveiled by Dr. Gates, who paid an eloquent and well
deserved tribute to the worth of these departed members.

In the course of his remarks, Dr. Gates said: He had been looking
forward for a quarter of a century to the present occasion. It had
been the dream of his life that he would be permitted to take part in
the exercises in connection with the Centennial Celebration of the
old Church where he had officiated as pastor for so long.

The closing meeting was held on Wednesday evening. After reading of
Scripture by Dr. Hay, the chairman, and prayer by Rev. Joseph McLeod,
D. D., the writer gave a summary of the History of the Church, which
took forty minutes in delivery, and was followed by the Revs. G. O.
Gates, David Hutchinson, and A. S. Lewis, each of whom in order
eloquently presented the subject assigned him, viz., The Church of
the Past,—The Present,—and The Future. Deacon D. Hunt read an account
of the mortgages that had been on the present buildings, after which
Deacon S. H. Davis and Trustee John Vanwart coming to the platform
consigned the remaining mortgage to the flames, while the large
congregation rose to their feet and sang “Praise God from Whom all
Blessings Flow,” and the Church bell rang out a joyous peal.

The music at all the services, which was of a high order, was
furnished by the choir assisted by leading soloists of the City, and
was under the direction of Mr. George T. Cooper, Choir Leader, while
the Organist, Mr. Stanley E. Fisher, presided at the organ.

The following is the complete programme of the exercises:

Sunday, May 22nd.

Morning Service, . . . 11 o’clock

———————

DOXOLOGY AND INVOCATION

HYMN NO. 17, “O Worship the Lord in the beauty of
Holiness”

RESPONSIVE READING, PSALM XC.

CHANT, PSALM. XCVIII.—“O sing Unto the Lord a New Song”

READING SCRIPTURE

Te Deum Laudamus in G, (J. L. Hopkins) . . . THE CHOIR

Prayer.

Offering.

HYMN No. 33, . . . “My God how Wonderful Thou Art”

SERMON: REV. G. O. GATES, D. D.
Subject, “A Centennial Review—Here and There during
A Hundred Years.”

Benediction.

——————

Sunday School, 2.30 p. m.
SPECIAL ANNIVERSARY SERVICE.

——————

EVENING SERVICE, . . . 7 O’CLOCK

DOXOLOGY AND INVOCATION
HYMN No. 149, . . . “All Hail the Power of
Jesus’ Name”

READING SCRIPTURE

SOLO, . . . “Hear My Prayer,” . . . Mendelssohn
MISS CATHERS.

PRAYER.

ANTHEM, . . . “I will Sing of Thy Power,” Sullivan

OFFERING.

HYMN No. 163, . . .“Jesus, Thou Joy of Loving Hearts”

SERMON, . . . Subject: “A Gracious Promise”
REV. G. O. GATES, D. D.

Quartette, . . . “There is a Land” . . . M. Crowninshield
MISS CATHERS, MRS. GRANT, MESSRS. COOPER AND KINGSMILL

HYMN No. 151, . . . “Crown Him with Many Crowns”

BENEDICTION.

Monday, May 23rd, 3.30 p. m.

——————

MASS MEETING

Baptist Women’s Missionary Aid Societies of St. John.

CHAIRMAN, MRS. N. C. SCOTT, President Germain Street
Society.

HYMN.
BIBLE READING.
PRAYER.
Historical Sketch of the Society, . . . MRS. LEBARON VAUGHAN

SELECTIONS ON NORTHWEST MISSIONS.

SOLO, . . . MRS. GRANT

ADDRESS, . . . Subject, “Grande Ligne Mission”

REV. G. O. GATES, D. D.

SILVER OFFERING FOR HOME MISSIONS.

——————

MASS MEETING, 8 P. M.
Baptist Young Peoples Societies of St. John.

CHAIRMAN: MR. C. R. WASSON President Germain Street
Society.

HYMN No. 416, . . . “Onward, Christian Soldiers”

ANTHEM, “Sing Alleluia Forth,” (P. A. Schnecker) THE
CHOIR

READING SCRIPTURE.

SOLO, . . . “Fear Not Ye, O Israel,” Dudley Buck
MR. JAMES W. GRIFFITH.

Prayer.

DUET, . . . “I Waited for the Lord,” Mendelssohn
MRS. CROCKETT, MISS CATHERS.

HISTORICAL SKETCH OF GERMAIN STREET SOCIETY

Offering.

HYMN No. 402, . . . “Rescue the Perishing”

ADDRESS, “Ideals” . . . REV. A. S. LEWIS,
Yarmouth, N. S.

HYMN No. 822, . . . “How Firm a Foundation”

Benediction.

NOTE.—The Germain Street Baptist Y. P. S. C. E. was
organized on February 12, 1883, and is the oldest in Canada.

Tuesday, May 24th, 8 p. m.

——————

CENTENNIAL SOCIAL
FOR MEMBERS OF CHURCH AND CONGREGATION.

——————

COMMITTEE IN CHARGE:
THE LADIES ASSOCIATION.
THE WILLING WORKERS
CHAIRMAN, DEACON WILLIAM LEWIS

Prayer.

SELECTION, . . . Germain Street Baptist Male Quartette

SPEECHES BY VISITING PASTORS.

SOLO, . . . MR. KINGSMILL

SELECTION, . . . Germain Street Baptist Male Quartette

REFRESHMENTS.

NOTE.—The Centennial Committee was composed of the following Brethren
acting in conjunction with the Historical Committee: W. C. Cross,
Chairman, G. F. H. Buerhaus, W. F. Nobles, L.W. Simms, F. C. Fisher,
S. H. Davis, J.W.Vanwart and Dr. G. U.

Wednesday, May 25th, 7.30 p. m.

——————

CENTENNIAL NIGHT

——————

CHAIRMAN, DR. G. U. HAY.

DOXOLOGY AND INVOCATION.

HYMN No. 36, . . . “O God, Our Help in Ages Past”

READING SCRIPTURE AND PRAYER.

ANTHEM, “Praise the Lord, ye Heavens Adore Him,” E. Turner
THE CHOIR.

HISTORICAL SKETCH OF CHURCH, . . . Mr. T. D. Denham

Offering.

HYMN No. 150, . . . “Rejoice, the Lord is King”

ADDRESS, . . . Subject, “The Church of the
Past”
REV. G. O. GATES, D. D.

SOLO, . . . “My Loved One Rest,” P. Douglas Bird
PROFESSOR L. W. TITUS.

ADDRESS, . . . Subject, “The Church of the Present”
REV. D. HUTCHINSON.

SOLO, . . . “O, Rest in the Lord,” Mendelssohn
MISS BLENDA THOMSON.

ADDRESS, . . . Subject, “The Church of the Future”
REV. A. LEWIS

HYMN No. 415, . . . “Forward be our Watchword”

HISTORY OF MORTGAGE, . . . DEACON D. HUNT
(Treasurer of Church)

BURNING OF MORTGAGE.

BENEDICTION.

Call to Rev. F. S. Porter.

On June 5th, 1910, was extended a call to Rev. F. S. Porter, of
Liverpool, N. S. In accepting the call, on June 14th, Brother Porter
wrote: “I deem it a peculiar favor to serve the historic Germain
Street Church and to follow in the footsteps of the mighty men of God
who have served you in the capacity of spiritual overseers. May their
fervency and self-sacrificing devotion to the cause of truth be
perpetuated in the coming pastorate.”

Brother Porter enters upon his labors with us on the 3rd Sunday of
September with the assurance of the unanimous and hearty support of
the membership of the Church, upon what we earnestly pray and
confidently expect may be a very successful pastorate.

Rev. F. S. Porter was born in Fredericton, N. B., where his father,
Rev. T. H. Porter, was pastor of the Brunswick Street Baptist Church.
He received his elementary and business education in that city.
Having decided to devote himself to the ministry, he entered Acadia
University from which in 1906 he graduated with honors, the following
year obtaining his M.A. Degree in course. He pursued his theological
studies at Rochester Theological Seminary, graduating from that
institution in 1908 and receiving his Degree of B.D. the following
year. He was ordained at Woodstock, N. B., July llth, 1907. He
supplied a. number of pulpits in New Brunswick during his summer
vacations, and was called to Liverpool Baptist Church in 1908.
Married May 20th, 1908, to Miss Edith W. Spurden, of Fredericton, N.
B. After a successful pastorate of over two years, during which he
was instrumental in the paying off of the debt of $1,500, he has been
unanimously called to the pastorate of this Church.

Thus has this Historic Church completed the span of its first One
Hundred Years as a witness for the Master. From small and
insignificant beginnings, God has seen fit to graciously extend our
borders to the present enlarged sphere of influence as the Premier
Baptist Church of our City. With grateful hearts we review the past
with loyal confidence in God we anticipate the future:

O backward-looking son of time,
The new is old, the old is new,
The cycle of a change sublime still sweeping through.

But life shall on and upward go;
Th’ eternal step of Progress beats
To that great anthem, calm and slow, which God repeats.

God works in all things; all obey
 His first propulsion from the night:
Wake thou and watch!—the world is gray with morning light.

—John Greenleaf Whittier.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF DEPARTED DEACONS

——————

[EXPLANATION—In the following pages will be found brief biographical
notices of a number of our departed Deacons—compiled, as has been
noted, by Brother T. H. Belyea, Church Clerk, with the exception of
the first four names, which the writer has added from personal
recollections, at Brother Belyea’s request. T. D. D.]

In preparing the biographical sketches of the devoted Christian
workers who have served the Church in the office of Deacon, and are
now in the presence of their Lord, we had hoped to make the list much
more complete than we have been able to do. In some cases all the
members of the families of our departed Deacons being dead or having
removed from the city and our being unable to locate them, has made
it impossible to secure the material for writing an account of their
lives.

In the main part of this history some reference has been made to
those who filled the office in the earlier years, namely: Thomas
Pettingill, Jeremiah Drake, Benjamin Gale, James Holman, Dr. Simon
Fitch and A. McL. Seely. Among those who filled the office in later
years we recall with grateful hearts the following brethren:

SAMUEL KINSMAN besides filling the Deacon’s office, acted for many
years as Treasurer of the Communion Fund, and so long as he was able
was always present at the Monthly Conference Meeting, and the older
members will recall his oft repeated testimony—“Hitherto the Lord
hath helped me.”

WILLIAM BLIZARD A man of retiring disposition, and with few words to
say in public, but one whose life spoke loudly through his works in
connection with the business affairs of this Church—he having served
as Trustee as well as Deacon for many years. Some of the older
members will remember his faithful work as usher, he being always at
his post on the first stroke of the bell and remaining till the last
visitor was seated. For some years after its completion, the
vestibule of the former edifice was not protected, as the present one
is, by being closed in with inner doors, and heated as well, so that
in winter with the doors wide open the post of usher was not one to
be coveted.

W. H. HALL, though serving for a shorter term than others of the
Deacons, on account of his removal to Woodstock, did faithful work
while remaining with us. For some time he acted as Chorister of the
Sunday School, during the superintendency of Brother T. P. Davies.

GEORGE W. MARSTERS, after following the sea for years as a master
mariner, settled in this city as the representative of the Bureau
Veritas, and joined this Church, which he afterward served as Deacon
till his removal to St. Martins, where he died. He left behind him
not only a reputation for upright Christian character in the
community, but to the Church a constant reminder in the Bell which
weekly calls us to worship.

It seems but fitting that some reference should be made to Deacon
GILBERT M. STEEVES, who previous to his removal to Liverpool,
England—though still in the prime of life had—faithfully served as
Deacon, Trustee, and in other departments of the work of the Church.
As a man of sound business judgment his advice in connection with the
finances of the Church was most valuable, he being the first Chairman
of the Finance Committee. He also manifested a great interest in the
Sunday School, and filled various offices therein. He is still living
at Liverpool.

DEACON SOLOMON HERSEY,—Mr. Hersey was born on the Kennebec River
about ten miles from Wiscessit in Maine, November 1st, 1783.

When about twenty-one years of age he came to St. George and engaged
in milling and other branches of business. In 1820, seeking a wider
scope for his abilities and business energy, he came to St. John, and
for fifty years he was one of its foremost citizens helping forward
its progress.

In 1840 he was baptized by the Rev. David Harriss, was received into
the fellowship of the Church, and later chosen to fill the office of
Deacon in 1849; so that for thirty years he was a member, and for
over twenty-one years an officer of the Church.

His death occurred on the eighty-seventh anniversary of his birth,
November 1st, 1870. “Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.”

DEACON EDMUND H. DUVAL was born at Hounsditch, London, February,
1805. In early life he was converted and united with the congregation
of which Rev. Henry Althans was pastor. Subsequently he was baptized
by Rev. John Howard Hinton, and became a member of the Devonshire
Square Baptist Church. Coming in contact with many Jews, he sought
their conversion, which quickened in him a missionary spirit, and led
him to a more thorough study of God’s Word.

In the year 1837 he assumed charge of a school in London. Having
distinguished himself as a teacher, the British School Society
employed him as a lecturer, to promote the interests of education. In
the same interest he was induced to come to this Province in 1845. As
principal of a training and model school he discharged his duties
faithfully, and to the close of life he was equally distinguished as
an efficient Inspector of Schools.

While faithful in the discharge of his secular duties, he was active
and zealous in the work of Christ. He was a member and Licentiate of
the Germain Street Baptist Church. He labored in the Sabbath School,
and for the cause of temperance, and preached the gospel most
acceptably, benefiting greatly the destitute and neglected portions
of our Province.

At Willow Grove he did much towards the erection of an excellent
chapel, and for the elevation of the colored people there. On Friday
the 20th September, 1878, his mortal remains were interred near the
chapel at Willow Grove. Full of years, and much beloved, he entered
his final rest on the 17th September, leaving one son and three
daughters to mourn their loss.

DEACON CHAS. C. PARKER.—Charles C. Parker was born in Woolwich,
England, October 15th, 1817, and was educated in the Duke of York’s
School for Soldiers Orphans. He joined the British army in his
fifteenth year, and served with honored fidelity for twenty-six
years, first in the 90th Infantry and afterwards in the 72nd
Highlanders. He settled in St. John in 1858, from which place he
departed “to be with Christ” October 22nd, 1895, aged seventy-eight
years. When Mr. Parker came to reside in this country he was a
consistent member of the Church of England, but shortly thereafter,
during a religious revival conducted by the late Evangelist A. B.
Earle, in obedience to his convictions regarding the teachings of
God’s Word he was baptized along with his wife, and united with the
Brussels Street Church, under the pastoral care of the late Samuel
Robinson. He was elected to the Diaconate of that Church and also
served for several years as Superintendent of the Sunday School. In
1884 he, with his wife united with the Germain Street Church by
letter from the Brussels Street Church. Here also he became a member
of the Diaconate, in which office he served the Church most
faithfully eleven years, when he was called to the higher service of
his Lord and Saviour.

DEACON JOHN H. HARDING.—Deacon John H. Harding passed most of his
life in the city. In his business he showed much enterprise and
ability, and had been rewarded with a good measure of success. For
many years he had been connected with the Marine Department of the
Civil Service and was regarded by his department and the general
public as a careful and competent officer. He became a member of the
Church when a lad, and was connected with it through a large part of
its history.

He was appointed Deacon February 2nd, 1877, which office as well as
that of a member of the Board of Trustees and other important offices
in the Church he filled faithfully and well. In him the pastor ever
had a friend who was wont to express his appreciation in kindly words
and generous deeds. His death occurred at his home on Germain street,
Wednesday, May 22nd, 1901, at the age of eighty-three years.

“Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.”

DEACON JAMES DYALL.—Brother James Dyall united with the Church by
baptism March 9th, 1856. For many years he faithfully served the
Church as Deacon, and Treasurer of the Poor Fund. Quiet and retiring
in his manner, with but little to say in public, he conscientiously
performed the duties intrusted to him, thereby speaking the more
loudly, through his works and exemplary Christian character and life,
than mere words could have done. To many whom he assisted both in his
official and private capacity, his memory will be ever revered. His
death occurred April 18th, 1888, in the sixty-seventh year of his age.

Elsewhere in this History mention is made of the large amount left to
the Church by his wife at her death, which was in accordance with our
brother’s wish. To those of us who knew him well, his memory will be
ever green.

DEACON GEORGE A. GARRISON.—Deacon Garrison united with the church by
letter, November 22nd, 1823. He became a member of the Board of
Deacons, the responsible duties of which office he filled with much
acceptance, as well as the duties as Clerk of the Church until his
departure from the city in 1870. Deacon Garrison, who had served many
years as Deacon, Clerk, and Sunday School Superintendent, on leaving
the city in 1870 to reside in Washington, was presented with a purse
as an appreciation of his labors. He afterwards returned to the city,
and was with us till his death in 1887. At the time of his death he
was the oldest member of the Church.

DEACON MANUEL FRANCIS was born in the Faroe Islands, Portugal. Being
left an orphan at a very early age he was adopted by a couple who
became father and mother to him in all but in name. While a young man
he came to Canada and made his home in St. John. He first went to
sea, engaging in the whaling business which at that time was not only
a popular but also a lucrative avocation. Becoming tired of the sea,
he retired from it and permanently settled here, and again took up
the trade of his youth, that of a master workman in the shoe
business. By careful and strict attention to his work his business
gradually developed from small beginnings to one of the leading
manufacturing and retail Boot and Shoe business firms of our city.

He was converted, and united with the Germain Street Baptist Church
March 26th, 1848. Shortly after his uniting with the Church he was
made a member of the Board of Deacons, and was also for many years
the Treasurer of the Poor Fund.

Deacon Francis was a man of strong religious convictions, of sound
judgment and of a loving and sympathetic disposition. He was loyal to
his Church, a staunch supporter of his pastor and a loving friend to
the poor. “A friend in need is a friend indeed” was fully exemplified
in the life of Deacon Francis in the multiplicity of his quiet and
unostentatious deeds of charity. He died September 29th, 1891.

“Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.”

DEACON JOHN FISHER. Deacon John Fisher was born in Plymouth, England.
In early manhood he left his old home and came to Canada and settled
in Weymouth, N. S. Subsequently he came to St. John, which he made
his permanent home. He first laboured as foreman in the shipyard of
the late James Smith. Later he commenced to build ships on his own
account, and soon became one of the foremost shipowners of our city.
In March, 1853, he was baptized and united with the Church. Some time
after he was chosen a Deacon, in which office as well as that of
Trustee he rendered most effective service up to the time of his
death. He ever displayed a hearty interest and co-operation in all
the concerns of the Church, and contributed liberally of his time and
means in assisting in carrying on the work of Him whom he loved and
served. His strong vigorous faith, sound judgment and zealous
activity made him a power for good both in the Church and in the
Community. He died December 8th, 1882, in the eighty-fourth year of
his age.

“Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.”

DEACON JAMES J. BOSTWICK. Deacon J. J. Bostwick united with the
Church by letter from the Second Cambridge Baptist Church, Queen’s
County, N. B., January 4th, 1867. His sound judgment, executive
ability and conservative business acumen placed him at once in the
active work of the Church, and from the first he was able to secure,
and ever enjoyed in a marked degree, the confidence and love of his
brethren.

In 1879 he became a member of the Board of Deacons. He was also a
member of the Board of Trustees and of the Finance Committee for
about as long a time as he was a member of the Diaconate, while at
the same time he was identified in one way or another with many of
the other branches of Church work.

He loved the Church and was constantly seeking to promote her
interests, and was seldom if ever absent from any of its meetings
when it was possible for him to be present.

The pastor found in him a supporter ever strong in sympathy and words
of encouragement, and a friend to be relied upon. His death came
suddenly to both family, friends and the Church on Sunday, February
llth, 1900, while comparatively a young man, being only in the
fifty-third year of his age.

DEACON THOMAS S. SIMMS.—“A man to whom God hath given honor.” Deacon
Simms was born near Portland, Maine, September 12th, 1845. As a young
man he took up his residence in St. John and engaged in the Brush
making business in partnership with John Murphy, Esq. In 1872 he
branched out on his own account and through his executive ability,
energy and integrity, his business gradually forged to the front
until the Brush making Factory of T. S. Simms & Co., Ltd., became one
of the foremost and most up-to-date factories and business houses not
only of our city but also of Canada.

Mr. Simms united with the Church in 1876 by letter from a Free
Baptist Church at Portland, Maine, thus antedating the union of the
Baptist and Free Baptist Churches, which has since taken place. Here
also his abilities were soon recognized and by his readiness and
willingness to give not only of his means but also of his services
and advice he was ever one of the Church’s principal office bearers.
He became a member of the Diaconate, March 31st, 1879. He also filled
from time to time the office of Trustee, and many other important
positions in the Church. In the Sunday School he filled the position
of Superintendent for twenty-five years. Mr. Simms took a great
interest in the Denomination at large, in Home and Foreign Missions
and in the New Brunswick Sunday School Association. He was a zealous
advocate and worker in the Layman’s Missionary movement, being at the
time of his death Vice-President of the Provincial Council of that
body. His sudden death on Friday, December 18th, 1908, removed from
our midst one of our strongest men, whose loss was felt with sincere
regret and sorrow by his family, his friends, the Church and the
Community at large.

DEACON LAURENCE McMANN.—Deacon McMann was baptized September 5th,
1858, during the pastorate of Rev. I. E. Bill. He soon identified
himself with the activities of the Church, and was at all times one
of its most devoted members. For many years he served the Church as
Deacon, Trustee and Treasurer, and ever esteemed it a privilege to do
all in his power to advance its interests. After a long life devoted
to the service of his Saviour, when nearing the Borderland, he said
that his only regret was that he had not done more for Him. His death
occurred May 23rd, 1881, in the seventy-ninth year of his age.

——————

Since making out the list of the members of the Church at the time of
our Centennial, three have passed to that bourne from whence no
traveler e’er returns.

Our sister, Miss Hattie Gertrude McNichol, daughter of Mrs. Harriet
and the late John McNichol, on the eleventh of June.

Our sister, Miss Alice Josephine Woodley, daughter of Mrs. Rebecca
and the late John Woodley, on the twenty-eighth of August.

Our aged sister, Mrs. Mary Spurr Harding, widow of our beloved
brother, the late Deacon John H. Harding, on the seventeenth of
September, in her eighty-ninth year. For some time previous to her
death, Mrs. Harding was the oldest member of this Church, and so long
as her strength permitted, was a regular attendant at the Sunday and
week-night services. For years she took an active part in the work of
the Church, and was a leader in the women’s societies. Her gentle,
loving spirit and thoughtful consideration of others, as well as her
simple faith and trust in her Heavenly Father, endeared her to all
the members of the Church, and those who knew her longest, loved her
best.

“Oh, though oft depressed and lonely,
All our fears are laid aside;
If we but remember only,
Such as these have lived and died!”

HISTORY OF THE MORTGAGES.

——————

The church that was on this corner, and destroyed by the fire of 1877
was free from debt, the mortgage and floating liability having been
paid in 1873. The present Church and Parsonage were built in 1877-78,
and cost complete, furnished, about $46,000.

The first mortgage put on the property was for $2,500, on the
parsonage only. It was dated December 4th, 1878, and given by the
Trustees to Mary K. Carey, wife of Rev. G. M. W. Carey, then Pastor
of the Church. It was for five years, at a rate of interest of seven
per cent, per annum, but in March, 1881 a little over two years after
it was cancelled, and another one for the same amount, at six per
cent, rate of interest, was given to Sophia Isabella Bliss Robinson,
of Fredericton. In 1878 a mortgage for $9,000 was put on the Church,
particulars of which is given below. On November 24th, 1884, a
mortgage for $2,100, also at six per cent, interest, was given to the
Executors of the will of the late James H. Moran. This was paid on
August 30th, 1893, as follows:

$1,100 from Estate of the late Deacon Dyall.

$500 from Sinking Fund in Savings Bank.

$500 donation from the Executors of the Estate of late James H.
Moran. Mr. Moran had subscribed and paid $1,000 towards the new
Church before his death.

In regard to the mortgage for $9,000 mentioned above. This was given
on February 8th, 1878, to George Thomas, Executor of the Estate of
Thomas Gass, Ship Builder, in this city. It was for a period of five
years, at six per cent, rate of interest. On June 1st, 1881 a little
over three years after, it was assigned to George Wright Gass, of
Liverpool, Eng., and on September 30th of the same year Mr. Gass
assigned it to Lucy A. Gregory, Widow, of Fredericton, when a new
mortgage was made out between the Trustees of this Church and Lucy A.
Gregory. This new mortgage was dated October 5th, 1881, and in
December, 1884, part of it was transferred to T. W. Daniel, John Boyd
and H. W. Frith of this City, Trustees of the Estate of John Gillis;
and five years later, January, 1889, $5,000 was assigned to J.
Colebrook Carter, of England. On March 7th, 1896, $2,300 was paid on
this $9,000 mortgage, reducing it to $6,700, and the rate of interest
was reduced to five per cent. After these transfers had been made,
the interest on the total amount was paid by the Church to Mr. H.
Lawrance Sturdee for Lucy A. Gregory and others. This was done up to
1901 when Mr. Sturdee was paid interest at five per cent, on $1,700
only, and Messrs. G. C. & C. J. Coster, acting for Mr. J. Colebrook
Carter, of England, received the interest at five per cent, on
$5,000, but in the year 1902, the $9,000 mortgage which had become
somewhat mixed up by transfers, etc., was cancelled, and a new
mortgage of $8,000 was placed on the Church property, everything
being straightened out to the satisfaction of the Trustees and their
Solicitor.

From the estate of our late beloved Brother and Sister Dyall, the
Trustees were enabled to pay off the mortgage for

$2,500 held by Sophia Isabella Bliss Robinson,
$1,100 on the mortgage held by J. H. Moran s Executors,
$2,300 on the Lucy A. Gregory mortgage, making a total
paid on mortgages from this Estate of $5,900. This is in addition to
$2,000 given by Brother and Sister Dyall during their lifetime.

You will notice that there were mortgages on this property amounting
to $13,600, all at the rate of interest of six per cent, or an annual
interest charge on mortgages alone of $870.00. In addition to these
mortgages, the Trustees were carrying a heavy liability on notes and
unpaid bills. At one time there were $3,770 running in notes, and
$2,465 of unpaid bills. In 1879 the debt was reduced $4,000, but from
the year 1879 to 1902 twenty-three years in all the Church did
practically nothing to reduce the mortgages, except the raising of
about $600.00 through the Sinking Fund.

In regard to the last mortgage that has just been paid. In 1902 eight
years ago the balance due on the $9,000 mortgage was $6,700, at five
per cent, rate of interest, and owing to heavy expenditures on the
south wall of the Church which was practically rebuilt, and other
necessary repairs, and to wipe out some notes then running, the
Trustees borrowed from the late William L. Waring and Addie M.
McLean, Guardians of Hugh McLean s Infants, $8,000 at four and
one-half per cent, rate of interest. This enabled the Trustees to pay
off the $6,700 mortgage and all other liabilities of the Church. This
mortgage was drawn giving the Trustees the privilege of reducing it
$1,000 every two years, and at its expiration in May, 1907, they
could pay as much as they wished.

A few months before this mortgage was given, it was decided at one of
our business meetings to take a Thanksgiving Offering each year, on
the Sunday preceding Thanksgiving, and raise at least $500.00 towards
the Mortgage. The result of the appeals each year was beyond our
expectations, following amounts being received:

1902 ............... $608.00
1903 ................. 627.00
1904 ................. 686.00
1905 ................. 596.00
1906 ................. 905.00
1907 ................. 646.00
1908 .............. 1,128.00
1909 .............. 1,075.00
1910 .............. 2,516.00
————
Total . . $8,787.0

The people took hold of the idea with great interest and enthusiasm.

In eight years we have received sufficient money to entirely wipe out
the mortgage and partly pay for the improvements recently put on the
lower flat of parsonage and Church parlors, and tonight I am glad to
report that there is no mortgage on this dear old Germain Street
Baptist Church, now one hundred years old. It has been paid in
full—cancelled at the Registry Office—and in a few moments we will
see it go up in smoke.

During the eight years we have been working to reduce this mortgage
nearly all of our people have helped in its reduction, and tonight as
we burn it, no one can say that it was paid by only a few, but all
have come to our help. Many have had this very much at heart, and
denied themselves considerably in order to give their assistance in
this noble work.

I am also happy to report that in all the pledges of the past eight
years of over $8,000, the shrinkage has been less than one per cent.,
which speaks well for this dear old Church.

Now Brethren, here is the Mortgage. It is signed for the Trustees of
the Church by our late beloved Deacon T. S. Simms, Chairman, and G.
U. Hay, Secretary, and is marked “Cancelled by Certificate No.
83,348, May 23, 1910. J. V. McLellan, Registrar.”

DONALDSON HUNT,
Treasurer.

May 25, 1910.

Officers and Committees for 1910.

—————

T. H. BELYEA, Church Clerk.
D. HUNT, Treasurer.

DEACONS.

WILLIAM LEWIS.
W. H. COLWELL.
W. C. CROSS.
S. H. DAVIS.
DONALDSON HUNT.
J. H. WASSON.
J. P. DUVAL.

CHURCH STEWARDS.

RUPERT G. HALEY
DAVID DEARNESS.
F. C. FISHER, Treasurer of Denominational Funds.
J. W. VANWART AND W. F. NOBLES, Pew Stewards.
W. H. COLWELL AND J. H. WASSON, Assistant Treasurers.
S. H. DAVIS, Church Accountant.

TRUSTEES.

J. W. VANWART.
WILLIAM LEWIS.
W. H. COLWELL.
 SILAS McDIARMID.
DR. G. U. HAY.
DAVID F. BROWN.
D. HUNT.
W. C. CROSS.
E. L. RISING.

FINANCE COMMITTEE.

S. H. DAVIS.
D. HUNT.
W. H. COLWELL.
F. C. FISHER.
H. H. REID.
S. E. FISHER.
E. L. RISING.
W. F. NOBLES.
W. C. CROSS.
J. H. WASSON.
J. W. VANWART.
T. H. BELYEA.
R. G. HALEY.
H. W. ROBERTSON.
CHAS. R. WASSON.
LEWIS W.

Officers and Committees for 1910.

USHERS.

W. F. NOBLES.
G. F. H. BUERHAUS.
W. H. COLWELL.
DR. G. U. HAY.
D HUNT.
DAVID DEARNESS.
H. H. REID.
J. W. VANWART.
J. P. DUVAL.
E. L. RISING.
S. H. DAVIS.
T. H. BELYEA.
J. H. WASSON.
F. C. FISHER.
W. C. BROWN.

CHOIR COMMITTEE.

S. E. FISHER.
G. F. H. BUERHAUS.
W. F. NOBLES.
GEO. W. PARKER.

MEMBERSHIP COMMITTEE.

THE PASTOR, THE DEACONS AND THE CHURCH CLERK.

BAPTISMAL COMMITTEE.

DEACONS S. H. DAVIS, W. H. COLWELL, D. HUNT, AND
THE CHURCH CLERK.
MRS. DEARNESS, MRS. SIMS AND MRS. TITUS.

LAYMAN’S MISSIONARY MOVEMENT COMMITTEE.

W. C. CROSS, Convener.
W. F. NOBLES.
R. G. HAYLEY.
H. H. REID.
S. E. FISHER.
C. R. WASSON.
J. W. VANWART.
G. F. H. BUERHAUS.
S. H. DAVIS.
J. H. WASSON.
L. W. SIMMS.
E. M. SIPPRELL.
DAVID F. BROWN, Building Inspector.
H. H. REID AND G. F. BURNETT, Auditors.
GEO. OLDFORD, Sexton.

Resident Membership of the Church

———————

ARMSTRONG, Mrs. Andrew
ALLAN, Mrs. Fred.
ALLAN, Mrs. C. B.
ARCHIBALD, Mrs. Edgar
ASHFORD, Hugh G.
BARBOUR, Mr. and Mrs. Robert
BARBOUR, Miss Alice
BELDING, Mrs. Eliza
BARTLETT, Mr. and Mrs. Robert
BERRYMAN, Miss Anne
BARKER, Mrs. G. M.
BARKER, Fred R.
BARKER, Miss Florence Vera
BONNELL, Mrs. W. P.
BONNELL, Percy L.
BROWN, David F.
BELYEA, Mr. and Mrs. T. H.
BELYEA, Walter R.
BOWMAN, Miss Bessie
BLACK, Mrs. S. McCully
BLACK, Miss Margaret
BELYEA, Mr. and Mrs. A. P.
BISSETT, Mr. and Mrs. H. H.
BARNES, Mrs. Charles
BARNES, Miss Bessie
BROWN, Mr. and Mrs. W. C.
BROWN, Mr. and Mrs. C. Winter
BROWN, Mrs. E. Clinton
BURDITT, Miss Edith
BURLEY, Mr. and Mrs. Alfred
BURNS, Mrs. Andrew
BURNETT, G. H.
BUERHAUS, Mr. and Mrs. G. F. H.
BUERHAUS, William R.
BAKER, Mr. and Mrs. Avery O.
COMPTON, Miss Annie C.
COMPTON, Miss Annette
COMPTON, Mrs. F. G.
COMPTON, Miss Cline
CATHERINE, Mrs. Samuel R.
CROSS, Mr. and Mrs. W. C.
CROSS, Lois M. CROSS, Audrey F.
CROSS, Paul B.
CASE, Mrs. Bradbury J.
CASE, Miss Eulila
COLWELL, Mr. and Mrs. W. H.
COLWELL, Miss Annie
COLWELL, Miss Nettie
COLWELL, Miss Emma
CALHOUN, Mrs. J. R.
CHRISTIANSEN, Mr. and Mrs. L.
CLIFFORD, Armstrong
CURRIE, Miss Ada
CURRIE, Miss Rosalie
COOPER, Mr. and Mrs. Geo. T.
CHEYNE, Mr. and Mrs. Frank W.
COOKSON, Mr. and Mrs. W. A.
COOKSON, Miss Hazel S.
COOKSON, Miss Ina M.
CASSIDY, Mrs. A. F. CARR, Mrs. Arthur
CAMPBELL, Mrs. P. W. D.
CLARK, Mrs. J. Alfred
CAMPBELL, Miss Bertha B.
COFFIN, Miss Mary
DENHAM, Mr. and Mrs. T. D.
DENHAM, William T.
DENHAM, Miss Muriel
DAY, Mrs. Geo. W.
DAVIS, Mr. and Mrs. S. H.
DAVIS, Kenneth
DAVIS, Vera Edna
DAVIS, Robert W.
DICK, Miss Ella
DICK, Mrs. H. J.
DALEY, Mrs. Annie
DUVAL, Mr. and Mrs. J. P.
DUVAL, Foster
DUVAL, William
DEARNESS, Mr. and Mrs. David
DEARNESS, Miss Margaret
DEARNESS, Arthur J.
DURBIN, John
DEAN, Richard N.
DYKEMAN, Mr. and Mrs. F. A.
DYKEMAN, Miss Lota
DYKEMAN, Ewart
DODGE, Miss Georgie
DODGE, Miss Gladys
DODGE, William
DISHART, Miss Kate
DISHART, Hattie
DUNBRACK, Miss Winnifred
DAYE, Mrs. Fred T.
ESTABROOK, Mr. and Mrs. Geo.
ESTABROOK, Miss Maud
ESTABROOK, Miss Nan
ESTABROOKS, Mrs. T. H.
ESTABROOKS, Miss Elsie
ESTABROOKS, Miss Marion
ESTEY, Mrs. Jas. A.
ESTEY, Miss Lu
ESTEY, Miss Ethel
ESTEY, Miss Alice
ESTEY, Miss Eva
EVERETT, Mrs. H. L.
FRANCIS, Hugh L.
FRANCIS, Miss Ella
FRANCIS, Sydney S.
FISHER, Mrs. E. K.
FISHER, Mr. and Mrs. Samuel A.
FISHER, Mr. and Mrs. Stanley E.
FISHER, Mr. and Mrs. Fred. C.
FERRIS, Joseph
FOWLER, Burpee A.
FINLEY, Mrs. Joseph
GOLDING, Mrs. Emily
GILMOUR, Mrs. A. B.
GIFFORD, Mrs. Mary
GIFFORD, Lewis
GIFFORD, Miss Mildred
GIFFORD, Hildur N.
GIFFORD, John T.
GARRICK, Miss Pearl
GRAY, Miss Emma
GRAY, Miss Muriel
GRAY, Gerald L.
HARDING, Mrs. Mary
HUNTER, Mrs. Wm. J.
HARDING, Mr. and Mrs. Chas. E
HARDING, Miss Marion
HARDING, Miss Olive
HARVEY, Henry P.
HATFIELD, Mr. and Mrs. Wilson
HATFIELD, Miss Nettie
HATFIELD, Miss Mabel HAY, Dr. and Mrs.
METZ, Mr. and Mrs. Charles A.
MARTIN, Mr. and Mrs. H. C.
MARTIN, Chester
MARTIN, Grover C.
MARTIN, Miss Melita
MOTT, Mr. and Mrs. H. H.
MOTT, Clair
MATTHEWS, Miss Mary
MORIARTY, Mrs. J. R.
MARR, Mrs. H. G.
MARR, Miss Helen K.
MARR, John H.
MULLIN, John R.
MULLIN, Tyler B.
MORGAN, Mrs. Joseph
McLEOD, Miss Alberta
McNICHOL, Mrs. Harriet
McDIARMID, Mr. and Mrs. Silas
McDIARMID, Miss Enid
McDIARMID, Miss Grace
McDIARMID, Miss Audrey
McDIARMID, Miss Elsie
MCLELLAN, Mrs. David
McINTYRE, Rev. Dr. and Mrs. W. E.
McINTYRE, A. Gordon
McINTYRE, Willard
MACKINNON, John G.
MACKINNON, Miss Lizzie
MACAULAY, Mrs. Grace
McMANN, Boyd McNALLY, Miss Frances
MACFARLANE, Mrs. John E.
McKEE, Mrs. Jas. L.
NOBLES, W. F.
NORTHRUP, Miss Leah
NORTHRUP, Gerald
NORTHRUP, George
NOBLES, Miss Maude
OULTON, Mrs. Geo.
W. PERLEY, Mrs. Harold
PERKINS, Mrs. Thos
PARKER, Mr. and Mrs. Geo. W.
PARKER, Miss Mildred
PATERSON, Mrs. W. F. B.
POOLE, Mrs. Mary E.
PETERS, Mrs. Alice M.
PETERS, Miss Hilda PETERS, Arthur W.
POLLY, Mrs. Geo. T.
PERKINS, Edward
PETERS, Mrs. Fred A.
PATTISON, Miss Sadie
REED, Mrs. Charlotte
ROBERTSON, Capt Andrew
RAINNIE, Mrs. Gavin
REID, Mr. and Mrs. H. H.
REID, Miss Marion B.
ROBINSON, Mrs. T. W.
ROBINSON, Miss Lizzie
ROBERTSON, Mrs. Benjamin
ROTHWELL, Mrs. Bertha
ROGERS, Thomas
ROGERS, Miss Ethel
ROOP, W. E.
RISING, Mr. and Mrs. E. L.
RISING, Harold
ROBERTSON, Mr. and Mrs. H.W.
RITCHIE, Mrs. Ada
RITCHIE, Miss Helen
REYNOLDS, Miss Lottie Russ, Miss Marion D.
SHERRARD, Mr. and Mrs. John L.
SPEARS, Mrs. Sarah
STEEVES, Mrs. J. T.
STEEVES, Miss Lottie
STAPLES, Mrs. A. G.
STAPLES, Miss Hattie
SULIS, Mrs. A. W.
SECORD, Fred A.
SIMPSON, W. C.
SIMMS, Mrs. T. S.
SIMMS, Hugh Rutherford
SIMMS, Stockwell SIMMS, Philip
SIMMS, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis W.
SPEARS, Mr. and Mrs. H. C.
STEEVES, Mr. and Mrs. Reverdy
STEEVES, Miss Sarah
 SMITH, Mrs. Rufus R.
SMITH, Hollis Lester
SMITH, Mrs. Wm. S.
SABEAN, Mrs. Eldridge
SIPPRELL, Miss Olive
SCOTT, Mr. and Mrs. N. C.
SCOTT, Miss Maude
SWANSON, Miss Kate
SAUNDERS, Mr. and Mrs. Wm.
SPRAGG, Mrs. Moses
TENNANT, Mrs. David
TITUS, Mrs. Mary E.
THORNE, Mr. and Mrs. Samuel E.
THORNE, Douglas C.
THURSTON, Miss Isabella
THOMPSON, Mrs.
VAUGHAN, Mrs. LeBaron V
VAUGHAN, Miss Estelle
VAUGHAN, Miss Minnie
VAUGHAN, Miss Eva V.
VANWART, Mr. and Mrs. John W.
VANWART, Miss Myrtle
VAUGHAN, Mrs. Frank P.
WORDEN, Mrs. R. T.
WASSON, Mr. and Mrs. J. H.
WASSON, Miss Maude
WASSON, Master William B.
WASSON, Mr. and Mrs. Chas. R.
WIGMORE, Mr. and Mrs. Rupert W.
WIGMORE, Miss Ethel
WOODLEY, Mrs. Rebecca
WOODLEY, Miss Ida
WOODLEY, Miss Bessie
WHITE, Ralph E
WATSON, Mrs. Andrew
WARD, Luther
WARD, Miss Blanche
WATTS, Miss Annie
WELDON, John
WARING, Miss Evelyn
YEOMANS, Herbert

Non-Resident Membership.

———————

BELMORE, Miss Emily
BEST, Miss Ada
BARTON, Miss Ambrosine A.
BROWN, Miss Laura
BARNES, Herbert
BRAKEY, Mrs. E.
BELYEA, Mrs. E. A. E.
BELDING, Mrs. George
BRESEE, Mr. and Mrs. Herbert
BROWN, Charles A. J.
BROWN, Miss Ethel Mary
BILL, Mrs. Gordon
BOGGS, Mrs. T. H.
BARBOUR, Mrs. Nellie
BRIDGED, M.S. Mary E.
BUTLER, Mrs. J. Howard
COY, Mrs. Fannie
COY, Mrs. Joseph
COLWELL, Miss Eliza
CRAFTS, Mrs. A. C.
CLERKE, Mrs. James
COHOON, Gordon
CARR, Harry C.
HESLEY, Miss Margaret
COWAN, Miss Susie
COWAN, Miss May
CLARK, Miss Delia
DOANE, Mrs. Alice
DEMPSEY, Mrs. Josie
DUVAL, Rev. L. M.
DAKIN, Charles
DICK, Mrs. John
DAY, Miss Annie
EDGETT, Mr. and Mrs. James
ESTEY, Frank S.
ELLIS, Mrs. William
EVERETT, Miss Pearl
EASTWOOD, Miss Annie E.
FOWLER, Miss Hattie
FISHER, John C.
FISHER, Hiram
FISHER, Miss Edith
FOWNES, Mrs. Retta
FLOYD, J.
FARRIS, Miss Edith
FARRIS, Miss Elmira
FOWLER, Mrs. Delilah D.
FLETT, Mrs. Henry
FLEWELLING, Morris E.
FLOWERS, Mr. and Mrs. W. C.
GRANT, Mrs. Alvis
GOOD, Mrs. Jennie
GASKIN, Mrs. W. H.
GERARD, Mrs. Bertha
GROSS, Harley
HYDE, Mrs. Chas. H.
HARDING, Thomas
HYDE, Charles H.
HATT, Frederick
HARDING, Mrs. Olivia
HANSON, Miss Ethel
HUNTER, Frank D.
HEBB, Mrs. A. H.
HARVEY, James
HATFIELD, Seanen
HATFIELD, George
HATFIELD, Mrs. Ada
HARDING, Charles S.
INGHRAM, Miss Grace
INGHRAM, Miss Effie
JONAH, Miss Lizzie
KINGSTON, John W.
KYLE, Miss Maggie
LANE, Harry
LONDON, Miss Edith
LANE, Fred
MARCH, Mr. and Mrs. John
MORAN, Miss Lizzie
MORAN, Miss Susie
MITCHELL, Mrs. Sarah
MORRELL, Mrs. Otty
MOSHER, Miss Irene
MOSHER, Miss Helen
MOSHER, Joseph
MOTT, Mr. and Mrs. H. D.
McKINNON, Duncan
McKAY, A. S.
McMANN, Miss Mary
McKAY, Francis
McMANN, Walter C.
McFARLANE, William
McKELVIE, Mrs. Charles
McMANN, Miss Lillian
MCDONALD, Miss Ada
NORTHRUP, Miss
POTTER, Mrs. Allen
PRICHARD, Mrs. Charles
PITCAITHLY, Mrs. Agatha
POPE, Mrs. Ethelwyn
PECK, Fred E.
PATRIQUIN, Miss Lizzie
PETERS, Dr. LeBaron
PETERS, Dr. Maurice
PARKER, Charles W.
PATERSON, Mrs. Alexander
REEVE, Mr. and Mrs. H. H.
RAYMOND, Miss Lois
REID, Orlin
REID, Mrs. P. C.
ROBINSON, Miss Jane
SIMPSON, Mrs.
SMITH, Mrs. Amery
SMITH, Mrs. St. Clair
SULLIVAN, Miss Annie
SEELY, Miss Myrtle
STUART, Mrs. Gordon A.
STAPLES, Mr. and Mrs. Allan
SMITH, Colin SLEEP, Miss Lizzie
SCOTT, Mrs. S. D.
SEELY, Alfred
SPARROW, Mrs. C.
TAYLOR, Miss Alice
URQUHART, Miss Alice
URQUHART, Miss Annie E.
VANZILE, Mrs. L. M.
WALTON, Miss Martha
WILSON, Harry
WATSON, Miss Maggie
WISLEY, John A.
WILLIAMS, Mrs. Eliza
